On the occasion of a mass rally held during the visit of President Fidel Castro to the city of Santa Clara, Villa Clara Province, Castro delivers a speech that lasted an hour and 39 minutes. He starts by thanking the people of Santa Clara and the province for turning out in such large numbers to attend a rally that was organized "a few hours after my arrival" the previous night. The crowd laughs and applauds when he states, Comrades like Machadito [Jose Ramon Machado], [Jose Ramon] Balaguer, and Maria de los Angeles [Garcia Alvarez] "had no knowledge of" the rally, "but it seems someone told them about it, and they wanted to be here." Castro adds that while in Santa Clara, "I have had the opportunity to see something unbelievable. They could have had, like any of us... [pauses] to feel the admiration and privilege of seeing something that cannot often be seen in other parts of the world. The imperialists are more convinced now, and I say this because I think they are watching this even if it is via satellite -- Yankee satellites are prowling all over the place and spying everything. Though they may be thousands of kilometers away, I imagine they can also watch this crowd. If they would be so kind to (?send) photographs. Since they boast they can take the picture of a cat on a roof -- then they could, please, send us some photographs, so we can have a photograph taken by a satellite [passage indistinct] or cyclones. What is this? What is the revolution? A great system."

Castro goes on to describe the importance of the 26 July date in the history of Cuba. "For me, it will be a historic date that will last forever in the memory of this city and you, and which fills all of us with pride and fills us with confidence and faith." Then he praises the energy and force of the people of this province, stronger than any "nuclear plant." The fact he does not often visit the province, has nothing to with the "fondness, respect, and admiration I have always felt and will always feel for Santa Clara and Villa Clara," he tells the cheering crowd.

He states the number of provinces have more than doubled. When one used to visit Sancti Spiritus, one would also visit Santa Clara. "Now, time forces us to use airplanes and helicopters more. Time, also, makes greater demands on our [word indistinct]. What is more, work is more divided now. Many comrades are constantly visiting the provinces. All of us have our share of work. I cannot go to all the places as I would wish, and I do not have the energy I had back then when I rode a jeep through the Escambray mountains, grazing fields, plains, all those places, everywhere. I liked to do that and I was able to do it. Now, we also [words indistinct] different commitments, the country has developed its institutions. There have been times that have required a little more of my time for bureaucratic work. Believe me, however, it makes me happy every time I have the opportunity to visit some place and meet with the people and all the more so when it is a historic place [words indistinct] and a place as special as this province and city."

He explains he has visited the places that were facing the greatest problems, such as Las Tunas, where the heavy rains were creating doubts as to the final output of the sugar harvest. Santa Clara, he notes, does not fit into this category.

In another part of his speech he extols the participation of the people of Santa Clara in Cuba's struggle for its "definitive independence." It is impossible to forget, he adds, Santa Clara's role" in the final war of independence, in the struggles that led to 1 January 1959. We will never be able to forget the feats Che and Camilo performed here." The Cuban president then talks about the years following the triumph of the revolution, "when we had to fight for years against mercenary groups organized by imperialism. How many children of this province fought and fell in the patriotic effort to clean the Escambray mountains?" "At one point," he adds, "there were mercenary groups all over the Republic, Havana Province included." The focal point of the counterrevolution, however, was "here in Escambray. On one occasion, we deployed up to 40,000 men, tens of thousands of men from Havana City to encircle, defeat, to keep the movement from succeeding. We would reduce their numbers. If there were 1,000 we would reduce that number to less than 100, but it would not take many months, with the encouragement and assistance from imperialism, with the encouragement and assistance of the U.S. Government and the CIA, for them to grow again like marabou weed. Until 10,000 workers and peasants from Santa Clara and [words indistinct] fought tenaciously and intelligently until they totally cleaned up Escambray."

Castro adds: "We cannot forget the participation of this province in the fight against the mercenaries. There has not been a fight in the past or present where they have not been there in the front row."

Mentioning his visit to the local biotechnology center on 30 September, Castro explains: "One cannot imagine all the things they are doing. One would like everyone to witness what they are doing. The slides showed us how the work is done through the application of the most modern technologies to improve the strains and increase varieties and the work done with plantains following the sigatoka, which practically wiped out the plantain. Sigatoka caused great harm to existing varieties of plantain. This plague was most surely introduced by the enemy, because the enemy does not tire of doing things that serve as obstacles to our development and block the people's food supply. The plague appeared along an air corridor. In Camaguey Province it caused great harm to plantains, one of the main foods. Now there are new varieties that have been introduced and are being improved. When a new variety is introduced it must be done rapidly. The country's acquired capability to multiply varieties through the use of absolutely new techniques is amazing."

Castro then talks about the province's successes in the social field. He says the province of Villa Clara ranks first in education and that the infant mortality rate in the province has dropped.

Castro admits to becoming mixed up with the names Santa Clara and Villa Clara and explains: "I correct myself: Wherever I said Santa Clara I should have said Villa Clara [applause] and wherever I said Villa Clara I should have said Santa Clara. Please, those who edit and prepare the speeches for publication please make this correction. Well, everyone understood. I now ask myself, how [words indistinct]. It is said that Villa Clara is the entire province. Then why do they call it villa? Why do they call a province a villa instead of calling a city or a town a villa? Logic tells me this."

Castro goes on to talk about the revolution and asks: "What country has been respected more than ours? We have a revolution that has not known a single case of a missing person in more than 36 years, something of which the newspapers talk about every day" in other countries. Castro continues: "You see riot police in full gear going against the people [words indistinct]. You can watch that on television everyday. We have a country without death squads, something that unfortunately has existed in the brother Latin American countries. Tens and tens of thousands of people have suffered there." Castro asks: "Who has the right to destroy this noble work? What country of the world has more participation of the people and the masses in the things having to do with its everyday life? We can do this because we have the constant presence of the party and of the mass organizations. Everything is discussed everywhere." Castro adds: "We are not a people of political or military leaders [caudillos]. These leaders have disappeared with the triumph of the revolution." Castro continues: "We are not a people of political or military leaders, we are a people of ideas." He says the revolution has outstanding men but they did not receive those posts by inheritance. "A man can change, but what cannot change are the people and when they change it is simply for the better. This same people we are seeing here today are better off than 20 years ago, better off than 10 years ago, better than five years ago," Castro says.

Castro goes on to talk about Cuban history and the independence movements of the 19th century. He said the Cuban people fought for their independence for many years. "Along came the imperialists to grab the fruits of the victory, which was the country's independence," Castro says. He adds that in present times, nuclear weapons, the sophisticated weapons, and the so-called intelligent weapons are different ways of domination. He says the power of the superpowers and their rotten ideologies cannot defeat the Cuban people. "They cannot defeat us ideologically or militarily," Castro adds. "They want to dominate the world, but the world will tell them no in one way or the other." Castro adds that others understand, perhaps more than Cubans themselves, the value of the Cuban example for the world. They understand the political, patriotic, moral value of the Cuban people's position. "There is no power on Earth, there is no arrogance capable of crushing a people like the Cuban people," Castro says.

Castro concludes by saying he knows the people of Villa Clara will be able to fulfill their duty to attain victory. Castro exclaims: "Socialism or death! Fatherland or death! We will win!"
We faced a most difficult situation. I am sure that no other country anywhere in the world would have been able to resist one single month what we have been resisting for six years. This has not been worthless, it has served to inspire confidence in our country.

Many people believed Cuba would survive no more than three weeks after the fall of the Soviet Union, but we, without renouncing socialism or our achievements, decided to continue struggling. No one doubts this.

That fall was a terrible, very terrible, economic and moral blow.

When our country demonstrated its huge capacity for sacrifices, struggle, and resistance, confidence began to increase and the possibilities also began to improve.

We did things calmly, without haste, consulted everything with the people, the workers, seeking the consensus of the huge majority, and waging difficult battles to maintain the trust and faith of the people. The results are evident. The results are what we have been securing.

In the beginning we could not obtain credit to plant tobacco, sugar, rice, or buy equipment. Investments began to be made little by little. At times, we had to be reckless and we carefully chose partners. We also had to work with our own resources.

For example, nowadays tourism is the most vital sector. Tremendous. It has fostered most other activities. What we have done in tourism has been done, essentially, with our own resources -- and not making very large investments either: 40 or 50 million [no currency given] annually. There is also foreign capital, but I would say that foreigners brought, for the most part, experience. They manage our hotels better than we used to. Some of them are partners on an equal basis, but we benefit from the salaries, from what we sell them, from the services we give them.

This was done with our resources.

We have other important partnerships, as in nickel, and this has helped us. There have been other associations that have helped us revitalize enterprises that had been idle, which did not have raw materials, and the miracle -- a true miracle -- began to happen: The economy began to surge.

When you read news from the USSR [as heard] you see that the GNP keeps falling every year. It dropped in 1994, in 1995, and in 1996. No one knows when this is going to end, despite its huge resources. This is happening because of the chaos that was created.

When the Helms-Burton Act was approved, it almost destroyed what we had done in four years by imperiling loans and the things we are doing. Despite that, we have been able -- despite that and the other adverse factors, such as the food price increase and the oil price increases, what has risen even more on account of this whole Yankee adventure in Iraq -- despite that we have been able to maintain fundamental activities, begin the school year, continue with all the plans Dotres explained here for public health, and revamp and improve all of the country's activities. The main scare, the tremendous scare, of many businessmen is easing. The law had been having an effect when the Chamber's committees approved it, and the Senate approved it by a wide margin. It was already causing us...[pauses] it was not stopping our march. Businessmen are also recovering.

Everybody reacts when provoked. Businessmen, who had many plans, fell by the wayside, but our will, our firmness, could not be destroyed.

They are making us work much harder. They may be able to slow the pace of our recovery; they are creating obstacles, causing delays. We were able to maneuver in a way that they could not ruin the harvest by impeding the arrival of material and implements we needed.

I was also thinking when Lage brought up this problem that the United States had never found such a great resistance all over the world. Never since its creation, had the OAS been able to make a decisions against a U.S. law. The Juridical Committee and the meeting in the United States...[pauses] This had never happened. All over Latin America, Europe, Africa -- everywhere -- there is a tremendous resistance. The U.S. President sent his envoy to all those countries, and he was given a tremendously cold reception and has not had a major impact.

Yesterday, we were speaking with some of the 100 Pastors for Peace who came. This movement has grown a lot. They have been courageous. They carried out a 90-day hunger strike. This was heroic, a great deed that sparked support and sympathy from other pastors and other churches. They came with optimism, happy to have been able to bring the computers for the hospitals.

The ambassador was telling us that they leave from two or three points. The rest of the United States has a more understanding, a more friendly attitude toward Cuba. This is true for news people, intellectuals, businessmen -- who are the ones who suffer the most and exert pressure. We have to wait and see what are the significant results of elections there. For the country or the world, it would not beneficial should the extreme right win the elections in that country.

Right now there is a level of coordination, understanding, unity, that never existed before in the country. We have to continue enhancing this spirit. The people have very much recovered from the tremendous shock. The fact that we resist, as Lage has said, is a great deed, not just a deed, but a great deed. You cannot imagine how much Cuba is admired throughout the world!

In spite of the U.S. capabilities to spread slander and falsehood, the people of the world feel great sympathy for Cuba! This amazes us! From outside they see better than we, inside, what Cuba has done. How much sympathy, how much admiration, even among people in the United States!

I have met with at least 100 people and you should hear what they say. They applaud, applaud, and applaud the fact that Cuba exists, struggles, survives. The people of the world are reacting. They are seeing now what we have been seeing for awhile. Now they have a growing attitude of rejection. This evolution is undeniable.

We must not forget this angle of the problem.

We have hopes in spite of the very, very, very serious world problems. How these problems are going to be resolved no one knows. But world resistance to merciless and blatant hegemony will continue to grow and we will not be alone.

It has been shown that we, with less than anyone, are doing more than anyone. Before, when we had a lot, we did not do enough. This phase has shown us that a lot can be done with very little. There is not one child without school or teachers; there is not one sick person without a doctor. What country has that? Without blockade and big resources and many things. They are captives and divided into many fractions and parties. That is what has been imposed on them, what has been demanded of them. They are driving Africa to war, slaughters. They have turned tribes into parties. We did the contrary. We have turned parties into a tribe. [laughter, applause] We turned parties [chuckles] into a single family. That is why we must defend our institutions so much. That is why we must strive so hard against everything that tends to divide us, because that is the weapon they hope to use to carry out the dream of crushing us. We must maintain that unity and our democratic principles that are 100 times more democratic than theirs.

They have invaded the world with their vices, their corruption, their prostitution, child prostitution, drugs. They are immersed in a hell from which they don't know how to climb out and from which they cannot get out.

We do know that their path leads nowhere and that our path, if the world survives this madness, leads to success, dignity, happiness, and well-being in our country.

That is why no one should become disheartened in the least. It does not matter if our dream for 1997 is postponed until 1998 or 1999. I really see that many things are being done. We are working more efficiently and there is a greater spirit.[FBIS Translated Text] Let me turn off the music. Dear comrades: The long trip, the desire to be with your relatives, the place, and the sun do not make for the best conditions for a speech. That is why I was not planning to speak. Vicky [Victoria Velasquez, first secretary of the Union of Young Communists] has already expressed our feelings. I still wanted to greet and congratulate you anyway, I wanted to say a few words. First of all, I wanted to tell you that you have returned with the medal of dignity. That is the most important one for us. Secondly, I wanted to tell you that you have carried out a sports feat, all of you. You have fought with honor, with dignity. There were truly outstanding things in the Olympic Games. It is impossible to remember or repeat them all. I remember that our people closely followed everything that went on in Atlanta. Our people have lived the emotions with you and have shared the times of joy with the successes and have shared the times of sorrow in the difficult moments. [Words indistinct] for example, the Ana Fidelia Quirot race because we saw in her, the culmination of a heroic battle of many years. That is why when a reporter asked me how she did, I told him she had not won a gold medal, but that she had won a medal of diamonds. [Castro is interrupted by an airport announcement] The airport. [laughs]

Those were really significant feats. The one Driulis [Gonzalez] won [in judo], the gold medal she won because we know under what conditions she went there to fight. A few weeks ago she had been walking around with a printing machine [minerva]. It seemed a miracle impossible to achieve. It was also the miracle of our medicine.

Ivan Pedroso [in the long jump] did not win a medal and he was sure to win a medal. You know he had a difficult accident. I still remember seeing him in the hospital a few weeks before the Olympics. He was wearing a cast. It was almost impossible. I imagine they took him because they took into account his desire and determination. It was impossible to compete under those conditions. I consider him a gold medal winner because of the effort he made to classify in that competition. We hope the day he completely recovers he will be able to achieve the goals we had expected of him before the Olympic Games. He is sure to win a medal.

The victory of our baseball team was especially outstanding because you know what happened. You know how the great adversary prepared himself. You know how they tried to leave us without pitchers. You know how the team had to lift up its spirits to attain what he was able to attain. The team gave the country one of its greatest satisfactions. It undermined one of the greatest dreams of the adversary. [Words indistinct] women's volleyball team, real difficult games, always coming from behind. They fought until they obtained their victory, which gave the country a huge satisfaction. The effort made by our boxers was also brilliant. They won four medals. I consider the one won by boxer Duvergel is a gold medal, even though it is silver in color. He demonstrated his expertise, his experience, and he fell in combat as a soldier in the front lines, who is shot while fighting with courage in the front lines. He has the honor of falling in combat just when he was leading 15-5.

What can we say about the others, who fought with courage. Those who won gold medals in the areas in which our adversary thought it could defeat us. They could not defeat us. The effort of our wrestlers, weight lifters, swimmers, and track and field athletes was brilliant, including that incident in the 4x400 meter-relay, in which our comrade fell down. We could have won a medal there too. I am sure that all the Cuban people will speak to you about the competitions. I do not think they did anything else but watch television. It has experienced great emotions these days. Our country was the one that watched the most hours of Olympic Game coverage, almost twice as much as the number of hours watched by the United States, which carried the games, but mixed in with the commercials and 20 other things. The advertisements we carried here were placed on a little corner or on the bottom of the screen now and then. No commercial interrupted any event or any competition in Cuba. There was a difficult moment in which we did not know where to put... [pauses] because both television channels carried certain competitions in which we had volleyball on one and boxing on the other. Sometimes viewers chose Channel 2, but sometimes it had to carry normal programming. On the other hand we had Channel 6 carrying the other competitions. That was crazy. I do not know how many television sets were broken by viewers switching channels back and forth depending on how the event was going, the volleyball game sets were 14 points to 15 or the boxer was three points ahead or behind.

Now that I mention boxing, I must say that they behaved like giants. I am not just talking about Felix Savon, who is a giant. I am talking about [word indistinct], who is not a giant in height. He became a giant on the ring. He obtained a great victory on the ring. There were many things to praise, but the fundamental thing is that we must praise the courage, the effort, and the courage with which they fought. The lessons they have learned are also important. The competitions are more difficult.

More countries participated. In general, the countries made great efforts and we even contributed to such efforts. We felt the medal a Thai won was partly ours, because he had an instructor. How do they call them? [unidentified speaker: adviser] Not adviser... [unidentified speakers: trainer] A Cuban trainer. And other medals were won there with the help of Cuban instructors [as heard]. We will, nevertheless, not be so selfish as to deny others the possibility of improving in sports, especially in the Third World, where our trainers are, although some developed countries (?have asked us) for some trainers. We must draw the lesson that the Olympics will be increasingly difficult.

We missed the participation of Cuban athletes in many sports and we watched, with a certain sadness, that other countries did participate. The Olympics, of course, served to confirm how poorly the world is doing. There is enormous difference between the rich and developed countries and Third World countries.

There was a great ostentation of resources. They participated in all competitions, and we participated in about only half of them. How could countries of Africa and many countries of Asia and Latin America compete in horseback riding, which is a very expensive sport? Or in tennis, which has always been a sport for the rich? I do not know how many courts we have [chuckles] and what we do with them. Or swimming, which is a sport for the rich? And what about other sports for which no Latin American or Third World countries have enough resources? The Olympics is, therefore, a competition between rich and poor.

And the host country did all it could to display its arrogance, wealth, power, and resources. I read dozens of news dispatches from all over the world, you probably saw them, about the criticism of the host city due to its disorganization, poor news dissemination and housing, many criticisms regarding the way it handled advertising, and the television in which it featured only its athletes.

Those who said we were going to be smashed in football... [pauses] I mean in boxing, never mentioned boxing again. And those who said they were going to sweep us in baseball, never mentioned baseball again.

And I want to tell you a simple anecdote. A rumor had been spread there that I was going to attend the Olympics. I would have of course been very pleased to have been there with you, but you know that the situation is not the best, because one does not even know if a visa would be granted.

A rumor to this effect had spread at the State Department. They were asking whether this was true, because they had to be told in advance and so on. Someone said: Why will he come? To see how we will defeat their baseball team? Those were his actual statements. Someone said this but later mentioned baseball no more.

Our expectations or rather the results failed to match our expectations. We must carefully analyze this. How good was our information, what data did we have, what was the situation? We must also analyze the fact that we failed to realize the competition was tougher, much tougher; and that many countries, which have many resources, put them behind their teams. We must analyze the information we had and so on, as well as our expectations. If we were driven by optimism... [pauses] in general, our sports institution has never been over optimistic, because we have always surpassed our expectations.

On this occasion we lost medals; for example, we lost a medal when Pedroso suffered an accident. The great champion. He would have jumped much higher than this man jumped; I think that it was [words indistinct]. He would have won medal for sure. The accident, because the blow was accidental. These blows can only be received by the courageous ones, by those who do not settle to be 10 points ahead, by those who fight. With Duvergel's we would have collected 10 medals. We won some of them despite the accident [words indistinct].

We gained experience in Atlanta. Our team fought and achieved feats that others did not and could not. This was also the achievement of our trainers and doctors, and of our journalists, whom we must not forget. We must not forget the nearly 300 hours, I cannot recall how many they were at this time, but I think they broadly surpassed the 250-hour mark of television coverage, in addition to radio coverage. The world country that watched more of the Olympics and knows more about the Olympics at this time is indisputably Cuba, because, I repeat, the host country transmitted I think 140 hours of television and 250 hours of advertising. That leaves nothing to watch.

The host country [chuckles] that boasts so much, has been criticized even from the U.S. domestic press, from very serious members of the media, for the way in which publicity in general was handled. There has also been too much commercialization of sports, as I said before. The current leadership of the Olympic movement is to be held responsible for having practically professionalized the (?marathon). In addition, various countries have adopted several measures in the field of sports, for example, in baseball. However, what our female volleyball players did shows that we can win. Even if they introduce professional players, we are going to win, and we are going to win, home run after home run. Actually, we won most of the events in these games, and I mean this. This shows we can defeat them even if they bring whatever they want to bring in.

They prepared a super team, and they super trained them. At the end, we remained undefeated, in spite of the money they spent and the violations they committed in order to take away from us the athletes we needed in those competitions. We will show that it can be done, in spite of all those circumstances. However, it is not enough to have goodwill. We must think over about all of these factors, we must meditate deeply in an intelligent manner about the Atlanta games and think about how the other games will be. We must analyze why we are weak in some sports. How does our system of training athletes operate?

Perhaps we are conceited and we think that our system is very good, but our system requires some modifications. In what proportion are we practicing sports? Why are some of them not practiced? Because... [pauses] well, how many pools do we have? Sometimes, these pools have even been without chlorine. How do we use them? How do we use the few tennis courts that we have? Why could we not win some medal in tennis also?

We have to analyze what is happening with the long distance races, and even with the fast races. Where have we stayed behind? We must analyze all of the work done by the institutions of sports, all of the work of the various branches of our sports; how are they working, what do we need to do? Because I think we can do more, much more, and if necessary, even in Ping-Pong. It is no longer that difficult for a Cuban to qualify for a Ping-Pong competition. I think we have to think this over, we have to deeply think over about everything we do in sports, and how we are doing, and what we can improve so that we will win more medals all of the time, even if there are more countries participating and even if the countries spend much more money all the time.

There will always be arguments. For example, if there is such and such a thing; if Ana Fidelia was thinking about the Motola woman or Motorola...[pauses] I do not know what her name is. [Someone says Maria Motola; Fidel chuckles] It seems as if the entire competition was only with her. Nonetheless, she made a very wise, emotional statement to the press. She said that she had warned that one should not ignore the two Russian women, that they worked in pairs to put obstacles... [pause] so that one would help the other.

Then, others say that even if Duvergel had the lead he should have been more careful. However, we must not criticize the courageous one. I say that was a coincidence. But those are just a few. In general, the people felt he was going to win the match. He was superior all around, and when he again meets his rival somewhere, this gentleman is not going to make it. The difference will be even greater.

We will always find that there are various opinions. However, above all what prevails here is admiration for all of you. There is a feeling of recognition for our Olympic delegation; we are proud of your achievements. You provided us with great satisfaction with the victories you achieved in key sports and which we all appreciate very much. A defeat in baseball would have been terribly bitter, the same goes for women's volleyball. We achieved victory, struggling mercilessly with an unsurpassable dignity. The people feel recognition, gratitude; there is a feeling of emotion that is very great and unforgettable about what you did in these Olympics right there, yes, right there where you did it. And what can we say about the many decent persons who at times applauded our teams? They applauded our athletes because their quality inspired them with admiration for what you accomplished.

I am going to end now. There are no more clouds or shadows looming around, and I want to express the pride of our country for what you have done. I want to voice our gratitude and promise that with or without the special period, regardless, because these are the Olympics we attended during the special period when we have lacked so many resources, the country will continue struggling so that we may continue to have more and more glory in sports for the fatherland, so that we may continue to have more and more happiness for you and for our people.

Socialism or death! Fatherland or death! We will win! [applause][FBIS Summary] Castro begins his speech by saying he was glad he accepted the invitation to attend the meeting because otherwise, he would have missed something very valuable. He added: "While I listened to you, I was full of admiration. Not because of the way in which you expressed yourselves here in Cuba, being U.S. citizens, you showed great courage [word indistinct] as you know how things are. You know better than we do how things are over there. We imagine how they are from what we read in the newspapers and hear in the news, but you live there. I was marveled at your ability to express yourselves the way you did, with such accuracy, your deep thoughts, the ideas you presented [words indistinct] I said to myself: What a great school this is! [laughter] Some people probably believe you came here to be indoctrinated. In that case, it would really be the other way around. You have come here to indoctrinate us. What better school is there than the country where you live. Not exactly a school of capitalism, but a school of what capitalism is. As Vicky said, she was not here to persuade you, but to seek understanding and exchange ideas. Neither did I. Of course, there is nothing you need to be convinced of. You are so [words indistinct] inconceivable. That cannot be the world's destiny. You know that [words indistinct] I was really amazed by the way you said it. That is why I said that you are in the best school. I imagine that not only the 140 or 150 youths who are here, but many more, have reached the same conclusions you reached after thinking, and thinking, and thinking. You have constructed and developed noble, humane, healthy and beautiful ideas!"

Regarding the Olympics, Castro says that according to reports, there was some disorganization and notes various criticisms. Then he adds: "Today members of the delegation told me of the efforts they made to bribe Cuban athletes: messages, letters, notices, everything to [word indistinct] Cuban athletes. They offered anything."

Castro ends his criticism of the Olympics saying: "As I said to the athletes, there was a rumor that I would be going to Atlanta to watch the games. It would not have occurred to me, because in these cases one is exposed to not being granted a visa, to humiliations [words indistinct] although we are not too far, the flight lasts less than two hours. Someone in the State Department said... [pauses] well they were saying that if I had those plans I had to let them know in advance to make all the necessary paperwork. However, why should I go? To see them defeat the Cuban baseball team? There was a lot of propaganda about defeating our baseball team. In addition, during the Olympic period they bought four of our best pitchers. Hence, winning those games was almost a miracle. They won, they did not lose a single game. They bought athletes. They also wanted to humiliate us in boxing. They bought athletes, but only one member of the delegation defected. According to experts on the subject -- I have not investigated much -- it had to do with skirts. Well, that's fine, maybe [words indistinct] a mild sentence, but we could have married him here. What can we do? [words indistinct] Oh, well, apparently he fell in love with a girl, I do not know her nationality, but I assume she was a U.S. woman. Is that unusual? I believe that those who participated in this meeting, mostly women... [pauses] there is nothing strange in an athlete falling in love over there. That, however, was all they got. From what I have heard, it was not because of money. That is all I know about the case so far."

Later on in his speech, Castro says that the current political and social situation in the United States is worrisome. He refers to recently approved laws in which large budget cuts are made to social programs. He criticizes the growing xenophobia, and new measures against immigrants. He continues: "The antiterrorist measures that they are adopting pose a serious threat to individual rights and freedoms with various pretexts. U.S. Administrations over the last few years -- at least since the dawn of the Revolution -- have been champions of terrorist tactics."

Castro says the return to savage capitalism is worrisome and then discusses the serious consequences of the so-called neoliberalism. He says: "How can you prevent this in a unipolar world? U.S. hegemony is everywhere: economic, technological, military [words indistinct] political, and financial. The United States has only to lift a finger and suddenly there is no credit for anyone. It is the world's judge."

Criticizing large military budgets Castro says: "Increasingly sophisticated weapons are being manufactured, even though the Cold War has ended. Of course, it has not ended for us; it is worse; it is hotter than ever; it is not as cold as it is hot. We can talk about this and will address this. We have learned that they have built some intelligent (inteligente) planes. A report from an official organization speaks of intelligent planes, their size, everything. We could discuss this. The existence of these intelligent planes is strange. We find strange some things that have happened in our airspace lately [words indistinct] the small planes [words indistinct] you mentioned here and that led up to the incident that served as a pretext for Clinton to switch sides and support a law that he himself had described as cruel and [word indistinct]."

Commenting on the downing of two lightplanes on 24 February, Castro says: "Cuba played no part in what led up to this incident. Why discuss this? We are not talking about events over the course of one day; it was not a matter of some lightplanes just appearing one day. These planes had been engaged in increasingly offensive and aggressive provocations to demoralize the people, the country [words indistinct] and they were increasingly daring [words indistinct] defense mechanisms. We repeatedly asked U.S. authorities to get them to stop doing that, warning that it could lead to [words indistinct] there is more: They promised that they would prevent those flights, so [words indistinct] ourselves because we trusted that the government would go through the proper channels to prevent all of this. We remained calm [words indistinct] then the planes returned, truly to our surprise. This is when the incident occurred. It was inevitable. I can assure you that we are not to blame in the least. We did not want anything like that to happen; we did not want to help the cause of the worst group of people; the worst group of people invent things like this and the Helms-Burton act; they made this happen; they promoted it. They must have done other little things; of course, it is always the case that these things are done and not officially reported until 20, 25, or 30 years later."

Bringing up the subject of drugs, Castro says: "We are also trying to find new ways to fight that traffic [words indistinct] that are dropped and then picked up in launches. This has killed people. Some people have confused cocaine with powdered milk [words indistinct] to fight with energy. That is why our country has succeeded [words indistinct] every time someone asks me to pose for a photograph -- you can imagine how many people come to visit our country -- I accept, and I will continue posing with anyone who asks me to [words indistinct]. I will not be intimidated by [words indistinct] I will not say that the government is responsible, but a State Department official said that nothing about Cuba would surprise him [words indistinct] the campaign launched [words indistinct] of course we have protested [words indistinct] yes, I believe Cuba has been the most slandered country in the world. In recent times, all the media used to fight the USSR and Socialist countries are now being used against one country: Cuba. Cuba endures thousands of hours of propaganda, of all kinds, per week. I must admit, however, that during the past years some media are reporting with more freedom and seriousness about the problems in Cuba and the blockade. We have had to endure all that, but we have struggled."

"Surely, you have been able to attest the fighting spirit of our people [words indistinct] we have had to use some of the mechanisms used by capitalism. This has become necessary as part of the actions to face the blockade and preserve the revolution, the fatherland, and socialism. I think Vicky mentioned a book, the intentions to take over Cuba that existed under other governments, in other times [words indistinct] what if they take over Cuba and we carried out a revolution? I mean, if they had taken over Cuba, perhaps we would become a revolutionary virus inside the United States. This is not necessary though. There are many individuals there who encourage rebellion and awareness among the people. It is not necessary in the United States to [word indistinct] progressive ideas, because progressive ideas are in the soul and heart and in the school of revolutionaries called United States." [applause]

Castro adds: "Why are we being blockaded? What do they want? To destroy a model. We are the country most concerned with humanity, and not just here but abroad. More than 500,000 Cubans have provided services abroad, as teachers [words indistinct] combatants fighting with the Namibian or Angolan people; in the struggle against apartheid, which today is regarded as a great victory, and it really is, but it seems like a [words indistinct] No, first of all it is a victory for the South African people; it is a victory for the Third World, a victory of combatants who shed their blood fighting against the fascists of apartheid! [applause] If the name of Cuba is not mentioned, we have fought for just causes, for all the causes we believe are just in this world. Now our internationalism is basically expressed in the defense of Cuba, of Cuba's independence and the Cuban revolution. We must concentrate [words indistinct] in relation to peoples, in relation to states. With the disappearance of the Socialist bloc, we understand that our main internationalist mission is what we are doing: defending our fatherland, the revolution and the achievements of socialism in our country. How do we defend socialism? With our ideas, our principles, our methods, which are as humane as whatever existed before in any other part of the world. There is not a single case of missing people here; not a single man killed in the streets, and this happens everyday in other places. There is violence against workers because they are defending their rights. We see this in Europe, the United States, and everywhere. We see tear gas, dogs, horses. In Great Britain, we often see large horses used to disperse a demonstration. You will not see anything like that here. You will not see death squads or paramilitary groups repressing [words indistinct], or trade in vital human organs, or child prostitution, or many other things that exist [words indistinct] they want to destroy this country. The world cannot be governed that way. U.S. leaders are making a mistake. They do not know how to direct the world. They were incapable of organizing the Atlanta Olympics well. [laughs] I do not think they can govern the world. They have established a sort of de facto government in the world, but the world is not governable. One day they will discover that the world is not governable, and that the world is increasingly more aware of realities, and people are more aware of their rights each day.

Castro then discusses U.S. attempts to penalize the world for doing business with Cuba, saying: "There is growing resistance to U.S. attempts to rule the world. More and more laws are forthcoming: Do not invest here, do not invest there. If they cannot govern the United States, how can they govern a world that four years from now will include 6 billion people?"

At the end of his speech, Castro refers to an upcoming socialist youth festival, and says: "We hope the U.S. delegation will be as large as possible, and if you are banned from traveling, do as Pastors for Peace, the [word indistinct] and the U.S. Constitution does not ban U.S. citizens from traveling Cuba."

The meeting ends with Castro making the traditional calls: Socialism or death! Fatherland or death! We will win!Fidel Castro begins this 28-minute speech by praising the factory's "impressive" output of tools, spare parts, and machinery as outlined by its director, Salvador Ramirez Rodriguez.

Castro tells the workers: "We are beginning to move forward. I imagine how many difficulties you have faced with electricity, raw materials, spare parts, and all that, and with steel and equipment delivery. I am also happy to see your great enthusiasm, satisfaction with what you are doing, and awareness of the importance of your job. The value of what you are doing cannot be measured only by the amount of pesos earned, but by the effect your production has on the nation's economy."

Castro notes that the 2,000 carts the factory plans to build this year will be used to transport more than 3 million arrobas of sugarcane daily. At this point Castro debates whether it is 2 million or 3 million arrobas and finally wonders: "Am I mixing up my math or what?" The crowd laughs. Castro also says that taking into account the carts and tow trucks being repaired, in the future the country will have the capability to transport 8 million arrobas a day more than this year.

The Cuban president reports: "Another thing we are going to do is to establish communication systems in every sugar mill. These will link the directors, the entire factory, the sugar combines, the work brigades, and the workers doing the cutting." He explains that communication will now be immediate in the sugar mills and will better use all equipment.

Castro then says that depending on how Mercedes Benz "treats us and on how everything goes," the 500 sugar combines being built in a nearby factory will have Mercedes Benz motors, which are worth more than $20,000 each. He explains that Soviet motors are deficient and have to be repaired all the time, while those by Mercedes "can work an entire harvest without having to be repaired." Castro reports that 500 Taino motors are being built as well.

After pointing out the efficiency of the Mercedes Benz and Taino motors, Castro predicts: "We will be able to achieve the kind of harvest we used to have, and this, using half the sugar combines."

Castro notes that the production of agricultural tools and plows are of great importance for sugar and agriculture in general. "The production, modernization, and reconstruction of rice harvest machines is of great importance to the country," Castro notes.

The Cuba president explains that one important aspect of this factory is that it serves the entire country, not just Holguin Province.

Castro reminisces about the days of the Soviet Union, without mentioning it by name, wondering who could have imagined 15 years ago that Cuba's "friend, brother, would collapse in spite of its huge resources." He then notes that Cuba has the will to win and to defend its firm ideas. Castro lists the merits of the Soviet Union, which "for many years helped us resist the craving giant [United States] that wanted to swallow us, until we acquired the strength to stand alone and struggle and work in the face of the giant."

Castro closes his speech congratulating the workers and wishing them success. He is greeted by loud applause. He then tells the workers that standing before people like them it is most appropriate to proclaim: "Socialism or death! Fatherland or death! We will win!"

The people applaud and shout: "We will win! Viva Fidel!"[FBIS Translated Excerpt] [Acanda] Commander, have you been congratulated by many people on your birthday?

[Castro] No.

[Acanda] What do you mean, no?

[Castro] [laughs] He is asking a question.

[Acanda] Not many people have congratulated you?

[Castro] There has not been much time. The congratulations are coming in little by little. A few minutes ago I was congratulated and, besides, I am not a year older yet.

[Acanda] Few hours remain.

[Castro] [laughs]

[Acanda] You know that news agencies constantly report that you are not in good health. How do you feel at 70?

[Castro] Some of those agencies are older than I am.

[Acanda] That is true.

[Castro] They are somewhat [word indistinct] too. The same happens to me.

[Acanda] How do you feel?

[Castro] I am fine.

[Acanda] Are you in good health? Do you exercise? How do you feel?

[Castro] You want me to tell you that I am in serious condition, that I am coming from a hospital or what?

[Acanda] No, what I want to know is your overall health condition. How do you feel? The people want to know.

[Castro] I am doing fine. I always say I am fine and I always believe it.

[Acanda] Even if you were not in good health?

[Castro] I get a cold now and then. I am in especially good spirits, which is very important. The agencies are the ones that say I am sick.

[Acanda] What agency are you talking about? The CIA or the news agencies?

[Castro] The CIA did everything they could to undermine my health and in spite of everything, here we are. We have turned 70. I am also aware that I am not eternal. I am of flesh and bone like all the rest and I am subject to all the conditions facing everybody else, but that does not concern me at all. I do not know why people pay so much attention to our health. This revolution has been made. No one can destroy it. Our health was more important during the early days in which the man played a more important role, but now we have a full-fledged revolution with so many people, with so many cadres, with so many intelligent people, and with a people that have an awareness like the one we have. What danger can there be for the revolution? Everything is relative. What do I think? That one's life is relative at this stage of the game. Even health is relative. I do not see why they place so much importance on our health. Why are they so impatient?

[Acanda] Do you, let's say...

[Castro, interrupting] I do a little exercise. Yes, yes. I have done it all my life. Perhaps I cannot climb the Turquino with the same ability with which I climbed it before, but I always do a little exercise. It is my duty to do it. I feel better after doing it. I am disciplined with my food. I laugh at all the tables.

[Acanda] What tables?

[Castro] The nutrition tables. I experiment with them on myself. I place much importance on vegetables, for example. I know of their benefit for the body. I know about the benefits of minerals and vitamins. In this regard I am very disciplined. I have no problems.

[Acanda] Your energy?

[Castro] I still have some excess energy because I always have a small layer of fat. I would like to be like when I was on the mountain range, with a few less pounds than the ones I have now. I have a little fat. The time comes when the body gets used to it in such a way that even if I eat a little, my weight is maintained. If I get careless one day -- because sometimes I have to attend a dinner -- the weight increases. My body has adapted. There are people who eat a great deal and do not gain weight. There are others who eat a little, but gain weight. You just have to find a normal equilibrium.

[Acanda] Practically all your life is here in this exhibit. It is also the revolution's life.

[Castro] I have to look at it. I have not seen it completely. I see they have mixed the first part with the final part and the final part with the first part.

[Acanda] No.

[Castro] I see a picture of the Moncada Barracks and then I see a picture of me in Palma. There is no chronological order here.

[Acanda] Do you look at pictures often? Do you like to look at pictures?

[Castro] No. There are many pictures here. The owners of the pictures are here. There are a few tourists who buy pictures of me on the streets. We could sell the pictures to collect funds for our public health plan. I asked them what they are going to do with those books? They told me some funds for public health could be obtained from those books. I saw that the House of the Americas came up with a small brochure and I liked it. I saw a set of pictures and I liked it. I read in JUVENTUD REBELDE about an editorial or an article written by Abel Prieto. This is an exhibit that will be turned into a book. We could collect some funds from those books. What about the books that (Corda) and all those people have?

[Unidentified speaker] He is here.

[Castro] My goodness.

[(Corda)] Congratulations.

[Castro] These people have a treasure in pictures.

[Acanda] Even though you say you have not been congratulated that much. The entire people...

[Castro, interrupting] (Corda) has just congratulated me, even though it is not yet 13 August.

[(Corda)] We are celebrating today.

[Castro] The pioneers were congratulating me. They were many because there were about 1,000 pioneer delegates there.

[Acanda] Would you like to send a message to the Cuban people on your birthday? We know they have congratulated you so much.

[Castro] Invented, improvised like that? I want to tell them that I am thankful for their support of the revolution throughout the years. I am thankful for the spirit they gave us all and the encouragement they always gave us during difficult times. I am thankful for their confidence in each one of us and we have a duty with them. I am telling you, my birthday has no importance. That is why there has been no type of official activity or anything linked to my birthday. For me, it is a day just like all the rest. It is a day of work just like the rest. Sometimes, things are beyond our control because we cannot prevent people from doing certain things. I have always tried to discourage it, but I have not created that habit. They still went ahead and did it. Newspapers have published a few things on their own. I have not seen a single one of those articles.

[Acanda] You have not read them?

[Castro] I have read them, but I did not go over them previously. Certain mistakes could have been corrected. For example, in one of the articles published in JUVENTUD REBELDE I saw a piece of information on the front page, I believe, which confuses Ramon with Raul. The article says I was riding with Raul, but Raul was too little, he could not go with us. It was Ramon and I. I did not take a look at any of those pieces of work.

[Acanda] Why not?

[Castro] Because I did not want to be an accomplice to the tributes. If I start reviewing those pieces of work I would be cooperating. There are a few minor mistakes. They were not of major importance. It was a generous, well-done piece of work. I had no participation in anything of the things that have been published. I learned that there was a ceremony at the foot of one of the monuments. That was done by the revolution. I do not see it as one of my things. I see it as one of the things of the revolution, I do not see it as my own.

[Acanda] Thank you commander. [passage omitted]
What do you think about the future of Cuba, of the Cuban revolution, after having seen that the pioneers are capable of properly using the resources that the revolution has given them?

[Castro] You are talking about [words indistinct] to get me to write a whole history book. [laughter]

[Reporter] On behalf of all of us, a pool. [laughter]

[Castro] You can imagine how impressed I am to see this palace renovated and reopened. I remember the day it was built, the difficulties we faced because the construction had a few problems. There were delays. I do not even dare think about the theater.

[Reporter] Unfortunately, the theater is still unfinished, but we have a new idea, which you are going to like very much.

[Castro] [Words indistinct] difficulties. In those days, there were many construction sites, many schools, and we did not have the most efficient organization at the construction sites, but things got done. Look at Lenin Square, which was completed in one year. [Words indistinct] Very beautiful trees were planted. We later built the children's park.

[Reporter] The recreation park.

[Castro] The recreation park?

[Reporter] Yes.

[Castro] The Pioneers' Palace was built in those days. What was the source of a lot of headaches was the theater. The area is landscaped now. There is different scenery now because all those trees grew. Even though the installations may have deteriorated a bit, the trees grew and they contributed to the current beauty of the palace. I think they have renovated it with new ideas, with new experiences, and with practical things that are more in tune to our realities. [passage indistinct]... the television technology. The young people are getting more familiar with that. It is totally new. When the palace was first built, none of that existed. We had no programs. [Words indistinct]...the vegetation.

[Reporter] Commander, had you been a pioneer and had you had the opportunity, what field of interest would you have joined in this palace? Commander...

[Castro] Electronics, biology, biotechnology. I would have possibly chosen the science field. I like the sciences. If you gave me a choice, however, I would have chosen the pool, which is really pretty. [laughs]

[Reporter] [Words indistinct]

[Castro] [Passage indistinct]...now with lots of years. I told the pioneers about the series of activities, but they wanted to mark the date. I told the television about my philosophy about [words indistinct]. The television reporters asked me about my health [words indistinct]. I told them, I do not know why you are worrying about that. I told them we have a full-fledged revolution, that there is no one who can destroy it. [Words indistinct]...we had hundreds of thousands of university graduates [words indistinct].

I see it as a working day. I looked at what they did. I see it as an elementary reciprocity with the pioneers and with the organization of pioneers, who exerted themselves in organizing this celebration for this date and who so affectionately invited me. They have turned this reopening day into a type of personal recognition. It was a pretext to be kind to me. I thank them very much. I am very honored. I am very happy. When one watches the children now [words indistinct].

[Reporter] [Words indistinct]...with brilliant pages the book of his life. Fidel has the canvas and we are not lacking an artist. Now that he is 70, does Fidel believe this prophecy has come true?

[Castro] It was very generous of them to write that. They did it because I practiced sports. I was an explorer. I had good grades in school, in general, although, as I have often said, I was no model student. I was in sports and other activities the entire year. People in school appreciated that very much. I am talking about the students as well as the teachers. I climbed mountains, crossed rivers, all the adventures that kids have.

[Reporter] Do you have nostalgia of that time in your life?

[Castro] Yes, I have a certain nostalgia. I remember we failed to reach the peak of the Turquino mountain because of a [words indistinct]. That caused problems for the expedition. We organized a few of them. Among those in the expedition was a Jesuit priest, who encouraged the kids a great deal. There was a team of explorers. I was not a boy scout. It was different, we had to wear long pants [laughs] and helmets, like the ones used by the colonists. Life has been generous to me because it has given me the opportunity of living beyond any dream, beyond any prediction. That is life. That was already written down, as many other things were written down, but now that so many things have happened, the people are attributing importance to that phrase. That priest liked me very much.

[Reporter] Why?

[Castro] It was his Spanish nature. He taught me discipline, studies, sports, and outdoor activities.

[Reporter] You were a very serious boy when you were young in Biran? People in Biran told us you were very serious.

[Castro] Everyone talks now about some part of his life. Each one of them gives his version.

[Reporter] What is your version? That is the one we are lacking.

[Castro] If I was serious? For my age I was. I was as serious as a young man could be at that age. I was always involved in adventures. I was very adventurous, as much as one could be at that age. In Biran life was very rustic and simple. People said certain things that were true, things I told Fray Beto when the book on my special period was written. It was about my experiences at age five or six. I was sent there and I believe the teacher played a diplomatic role with my parents. That was back in the [word indistinct] era. I was a very young boy and since my father had very good business sense, it was good business to have the boys [words indistinct]. It is true. In my house there was no electricity. We used candles, lamps. Many places had electricity, but we lived in the middle of the countryside. Little by little we began learning about some of the progress of civilization. One day, my father bought a radio. In those days, radios were big monstrosities. The only one who could turn it on was him. I used to read -- I am talking about a different age now -- when I was a bit older. I slept in the downstairs room and my father slept in the upstairs room. I took my books along. I read the 10-volume history of the French Revolution there. I read it in that little room, however, when the radio started broadcasting baseball games, I put my books aside and I turned on the radio. Those were the days of Armendares and [words indistinct].

[Reporter] And you loved ball games because people say you were a good pitcher.

[Castro] And we always... [pauses] No, I was not a good pitcher.

[Reporter] You weren't? Then are you being glorified over there now?

[Castro] I am being glorified right here.

[Reporter] [laughs]

[Castro] Now they even want to make me a professional ball player.

[Unidentified speaker] And why [word indistinct] don't you go to Biran? Women were waiting for you over there.

[Unidentified speaker] Everybody would like for you to go over there.

[Unidentified speaker] What for...?

[Castro, interrupting] May I finish telling this story or do you want me to start a new one?

[Reporter] Please finish.

[Castro] We used to take our gloves, ball, and everything else along with us when we came back from school. There were two school sessions. This appears on a JUVENTUD REBELDE report that is very well done and, I must say, very attractive. It mentions the time when I was going on vacation on my way back from the teacher's small home. It was no vacation in those days, but rather a lot of work to be done. It was during this time when our parents discovered that we were being mistreated. We were very skinny and our hair was very long because we were not even taken to the barber's shop. I had to sew my own shoes, also taking the risk of a scolding for breaking the needle or something else. My shoes were very worn out. I had only one pair of shoes of the kind that are worn here. I used to sew these shoes. No, this is my work. I do not intend to exaggerate. However, I had this unfortunate experience when one shoe got all torn up. Then we were taken back there. We were waging a war against the teacher. On one occasion, we pelted the school with rocks.

[Reporter] [laughs]

[Castro] She did not like noises very much. And we threw 200 stones while we were hiding in a grove of trees behind the bakery. We were very good at throwing stones. It was our revenge...

[Reporter, interrupting] ... Against the teacher?

[Castro] ... at age six. However, we were again taken over there. She gave classes over there, but she lived in Santiago with her sister, who gave piano lessons, and was a very a good person, by the way. Nevertheless, she had the authority and the resources -- when she got paid -- even though there were times when she was not paid at the [word indistinct]. I wanted to explain that I had no vacation time when I was there in Santiago. I had a vacation when I finally achieved the victory of being admitted to a boarding school. This is a long story that I will not repeat, especially with the many questions that you are asking me.

[Reporter] Well, right now what do the following words mean for you: Quixote, revolution, planet Earth, life, and man?

[Castro] They mean a lot of things, 100,000 times what they could mean [word indistinct]. However, planet Earth is very significant in everybody's life. Earth seemed to be an infinite universe. The word Earth today means the universe. Over the years, science and technology have made great advancements and many amazing discoveries. There is a new discovery every day.

Oddly enough, a man means a lot more than economic forces. There are a mountain of problems in today's world. This is very worrisome. This demands more education and a new awareness that was unheard of in those days. Who talked about the environment in the thirties and forties? Discussions about the environment hardly began 20 or 25 years ago. We have now become aware because of the heat, natural disasters, and the global warming. There is a universal outlook. In times past, your fatherland was a small plot of land, a small settlement near the sugar mill, then the school, and then the country. After all, the planet becomes everybody's fatherland. [Passage indistinct] social, geopolitical, and professional concerns in order to determine what a man is, as well as his value and capabilities. A few days ago, I read a small book that was published by (Combe). I do not know if you have read it, but I recommend it. He is a valuable individual with an outstanding capability for sacrifice, both when he was [words indistinct] and later when [words indistinct]. He firmly believes in man's capability, ideas, profound convictions, and experiences. This is the truth.

By the same token, when we speak of man, we also think of Marti, Maceo, Frank Pais, [words indistinct]. He does wonderful things. I believe that he is going to do even better things during this time of world hegemony. Men will now become more and more politically aware as they observe the abuses and injustices that are committed against this planet worldwide. I know it. Man is the most wonderful thing that has been conceived. I am not speaking in religious terms of a creation. [Passage indistinct] known by us as people.

[Reporter] Are you moved by dawns commander?

[Castro] What did you say?

[Reporter] Are you moved by dawns? They say you are always awake at dawn.

[Castro] I am usually reading. [word indistinct] the more papers I have, the more I want to read a good book.

[Reporter] What about this morning? It was your birthday...

[Castro, interrupting] No, [words indistinct]

[Reporter, interrupting] But, what about this morning...

[Castro, interrupting] No, the mornings are spent on papers. I don't have so much work now. I don't have so much work because there are a lot of people.

[Reporter, interrupting] But, what specifically did you do at dawn today?

[Castro] Today, I was hurried with all the things I had to do. I was thinking about all the things that had to be done today and tomorrow. I spent the day yesterday with several messengers from abroad. They brought me congratulatory notes, presents. One even came from Korea. [laughs]

[Reporter] Yes, that appeared in the papers.

[Castro] [words indistinct]

[Reporter] Have you received many presents today?

[Castro] Yes, it seems everyone sent me a gift. My problem is what to do with them. I had accumulated presents for many years. I donated them. I looked for a executor and he distributed them without making a lot of noise about it.

[Reporter] [question indistinct]

[Castro] I will answer you later. I will leave you for last because I think you want to use the others' time.

[Reporter] They have descended on you en masse.

[Castro] Of course. And the questions come en masse as well. [laughter] All right, all right, all right. I very much enjoy [fading, words indistinct]... a book perks me up. When I have periods of sleepiness, it later goes away. It happens to me at times, so I have this book by (Combe), which includes the whole story on the struggles of Che Guevara in Bolivia. That book eliminated my sleepiness. One is more or less familiar with these topics, and they spark one's curiosity to learn more about every detail. [Words indistinct]...it is a huge job. Every so often I do something.

[Reporter] [Question indistinct]

[Castro] [Words indistinct] are very popular [indistinct] summits are important because they discuss issues like human settlements, social rights, and the good accomplishments of the United Nations. Then, I will have more time to squeeze in a trip here or there, I have sensed this by listening to the planes [words indistinct]. [laughter] [More fading, words indistinct] The tourism sector and food industry have to train personnel. [Words indistinct]. How much does all that cost? I would say you cannot put a price tag a price on it. It is not accomplished with lots of money -- no, no, it has no money -- but rather with lots of good will and making use of available resources.

Thus, in all the programs, Enid [not furthered identified] tells me all the organizations have helped very much. [Words indistinct] helped very much in the palace reconstruction. Rather than reconstruction, I should say, renovation for the reinauguration, that is, repairs, maintenance, and all that. In general, all the organizations were interested in this palace and each one sought resources. In construction, I do not know, it may have involved accomplishing tasks. Salaries must always be paid and these men may have not had another job. We have been in a period with an excess of builders. You give a man a job and you engage in social work for a man who has no job.

Obviously we now exert a much stricter control of expenses in national currency because we are engaged in a struggle to reduce the amount of money in circulation. That struggle must not be abandoned. The same man could earn more, meaning an important part of his salary. He is not working, but if he works for his salary, that is even better.

So, with the people's good will -- we can call it a new awareness, that is, becoming aware of reality, adapting to changes, having a much clearer sense of duty and what must be done -- such projects have been possible. Others are being carried out in spite of everything. We are carrying out economic projects in addition to social projects. A hospital is repaired or maintenance is performed, and schools are enlarged.

[Female reporter] Neighborhoods are repaired.

[Castro] Neighborhoods are being repaired with everyone's cooperation; the residents look for materials. We are using our oil to produce more cement [words indistinct], opening a cement plant in Cienfuegos to produce more cement, improving the efficiency of work at Antillana de Acero, the steel foundry. Resources are sought and I might say that doing this today is three times [words indistinct] a peso or a dollar.

Today we have a third of that but, with what we have....[pauses] I say a third but it could be less. It is less in some things. We previously received tens of thousands of tons of cotton and now that cotton must be sought after and purchased to keep the industries operating. Tourism has increased. That is an important revenue source. The sugarcane sector is recovering. Confidence in the country has increased and allowed us to mobilize resources. To the degree we resisted, the people realized that [words indistinct] but it was much more difficult to get financing for the sugarcane or rice sector in the early years. Confidence has increased and that is what they want to destroy with the new laws, policies, and their aggressiveness. So the country cannot get more resources. They went as far as creating a monstrous law like that one. It threatens all the citizens in this country. It is an irresponsible action and it has created serious conflicts for them because it is a precedent everyone fears and they, the U.S. Government and the extremists in the United States, would now like to apply it to other countries [words indistinct]. The United States will have [passage indistinct] an economic target of U.S. imperialism.

Well, everything done here has been done under those conditions and it has lots of merit. We are happy that a project like this can be done under those conditions.
A question could be posed to the U.S. Administration that is blockading Cuba. In the first place, no one has the right to suppress the will of another people. Why blockade our country? We are a people who have been fighting for a better life for our children. We are a country with an education budget that grows every year in spite of the difficulties. Why is our country blockaded when we are doing that? Why blockade a country that has the highest number of teachers and physicians per capita? Why blockade a country where not a single school has been shut down even during these hard times? It is quite the opposite, new schools have been opened. Why blockade a country where you can find a school in the mountains with one teacher for three students? You can even find the case of a teacher for only one student to prevent that kid from going illiterate just because he lives in a remote region. Why blockade a country that has been stripped of half of its doctors? It is a country with the largest number of doctors per capita in the entire world. [applause]

We are a country that continues to train doctors. Why blockade a country where, in spite of all the difficulties, you do not find barefoot children on the streets? We are a country that has been able to keep our kids in uniforms even though the delivery of fabric material to make the uniforms has been delayed. Hundreds of thousands of new uniforms will be made. Why blockade a country where you do not find organ trafficking going on by people wishing to make money off other people's lives? We are a country with no child prostitution. We are a country with no death squads, with no missing persons for the past 37 years. We are a country in which people are not murdered, where people are not tortured in spite of all the slander, in spite of all the things that have been said about our country. We are a country in which not one state crime has been committed, where justice and dignity are our people's first love, as Jose Marti said.

What do they want for us to be? Do they want us to be what we see around the world? Abandoned, forsaken, and neglected people. Do they want us to be people without the possibility of making a living? Drug addicts? All the vices in our country have been suppressed not by force but by conviction and by our country's capability to work for a consensus. We have been able to do away with those evils. Why do they want to bring those evils back to us?

Instead of blocking Cuba, almost all the rest of the world would have to be blocked, beginning right with the United States. I wonder, even under those conditions, would it be fair to block you? So many millions and tens of millions of Americans who have been so much deceived by the enormous resources available to those who wield power. We also recall that Lincoln once said: One can fool some of the people some of the time, but you cannot fool all the people all the time. You are the experts in American history. You should know better about this. [applause] [passage omitted on chit-chat on how Lincoln should be quoted; recognition of Walker's struggle, Canada's help to Walker]

Your victory will be attained by the struggle of the believers and nonbelievers alike. As for the nonbelievers you have found along the way here, I know you can also find this percentage of nonbelievers in the United States, too. The American people have very deep religious roots. That is why the Bible is so strong there. That is where the strength of your movement lies. It also lies in the great truths that have been the foundation of that country. I am talking about the enormous contents of justice and dignity for which that country has always worked for. That is why you are respected. That is why politicians must listen to your words. They cannot reject your words. They cannot deny that your words are really eloquent and have great strength. As we listened to the words of people like you, the unity which our people want to preserve between believers and nonbelievers came to our minds. [passage omitted praising Pastor for Peace's eight-months struggle with U.S. Customs]

And we are proud to have companions in that struggle for justice, to have companions like you. Also like you, we have great faith in the fact that those principles shall prevail and sooner or later [words indistinct] although not many people can see clearly, we need to pursue those principles in order to face up to the mountains of problems that overwhelm the world today. They take many forms, particularly the form of violence, there are growing problems everywhere. These problems cannot be solved by making war or by using nuclear weapons. No one knows what they want those weapons for, especially when it is said that the Cold War no longer exists. What a deceit! What a great lie that is! Banning nuclear tests but not banning nuclear weapons which are tantamount to 1 million tons of TNT. [passage omitted on recollection of days of fast, tenacity of Pastors for Peace]

Nowadays, many people are involved in this struggle, many people who share your feelings, in spite of the fact that during those days we were the victims of [words indistinct] suffocation, the one that was mentioned here before. I am talking about the incident of the small planes. We had no interest in creating an incident, much less at a time when you were waging that courageous struggle. The fast started on 17 February, I believe, and [words indistinct] 21 February. That was an open act of provocation, which had been repeated many times. They were doing it more daringly. So they really were putting us in a position in which we had to prevent them from continuing. We had to prevent them from overflying Havana. They did it more than once. But flying once, or twice, or three times more was fundamental because, believe me, we had been patient.

The problem was that the U.S. Administration had given us assurances that there would be no more flights, that there would not be any other violations of our airspace, such as the ones that had been taking place. These violations had been taking place several weeks earlier, when we warned our antiair forces that we could not allow them to continue with those provocations. In fact, we had to set up mechanisms because those acts of provocations take place in a few minutes. When we received assurances from the U.S. Government that the flights would not take place again, nobody remembered that those mechanisms were in place, that those orders were standing, namely for our forces not to allow the provocations to take place again. So when new violations were perpetrated... [pauses] something which they were constantly threatening to do by perpetrating illegal actions, presenting different flight plans, endangering civilian aviation in our region with those tricks and lies. In spite of that, we would have been capable of continuing to be patient, as we had been up until that moment. But our mistake was to believe, to believe that the orders from the American President would be respected and observed by these people.

But with that shamelessness typical of the Miami-based extreme right, they insisted time and time again until they finally were able to bring about the incident, precisely at the time you were fasting. Of course, all this took place during the electoral campaign, and you know what an election year is like in the United States. Anything is done, even dropping an atomic bomb, to win an election. That is the time for electoral demagoguery. When that time comes, human lives come second. The consequences of the irresponsible actions are not pondered. There are some people who feel that killing and dropping bombs is to be firm and to put up a stand.

This system, which has exerted a large influence on the life of our people, without reaching... [13-second break in reception] a system which some consider intolerable in the United States. They do not want to forgive us for having resisted after the demise of the socialist bloc and the dismantling of the USSR. Later, all the truth of what is going on there will be known. Just recently, an article written by the son of Gromyko was published. Gromyko, as you know, was a longtime Soviet diplomat. Evidently, the person who wrote the article is a well-informed person. The article is entitled, "How a Great Power Was Sold."

It contains all the history of how about 10 Track Two's, Track One's, 10 Track One's were introduced to corrode that country from within, to break it down, to disunite it. Who gained from that? When we received the terrible news of what the establishment of a capitalist system meant [45-second passage indistinct due to station interference] the article outlines all the steps that were taken, how it was done, how much money was spent to do what they did. It describes how it was done, and it also mentions the people who were mainly responsible for what happened. Of course, this is a subject that [words indistinct] it directly affects us [50-second passage indistinct due to station interference] the blockade is the main obstacle for the country's economic development.

Despite the disappearance of the USSR and the socialist bloc, we have shown that we are capable of moving forward. As I recently said, there are two possibilities: First, that no other country without the conditions of unity, of profound convictions, [words indistinct] justice, and understanding of our people, no other country would have been able to withstand the blockade. We have resisted. Second, no other country would have done as much as we have with so little. Dozens of billions of dollars are given to one country or another in the world -- I do not want to mention any country [30-second passage indistinct due to station interference] Why is there a sex market with children? Why are there drugs? Why is there corruption? How can there be democracy in countries where people learn overnight about strict laws that leave millions of people jobless, that leave the elders without a pension. In some countries not even the salaries are paid. I had never seen anything like that before. There are countries where salaries have not been paid in five months [words indistinct] will have to receive millions of dollars in aid, because not even salaries can be paid. In our country everything we have done, everything, each one of the economic measures we have taken has been discussed many times. They have been discussed with all the workers, peasants, students, in the National Assembly, and again afterward. Those measures are based on understanding and consensus among the people [words indistinct]. [applause] You do not see that in any other place. That is what they want to abolish here.

For now, we have before us the real task of imagining how the world can be ruled... [pauses] because the world with all these problems is becoming increasingly ungovernable. No one is capable. The United States, the U.S. Government wants to govern the world, but it cannot even govern itself. [applause] It cannot govern itself [words indistinct] the United States really needs a government. [laughter from the audience]. It is said that passing laws is governing. Depriving the elders and the sick of their rights? Is it possible to rule a country with laws that foster xenophobia and ethnic differences and oppressing the minorities? Not only the historical oppression of the U.S. Black population, but other racial groups as well, like the Hispanics [words indistinct] In all fairness, I must say that American Indians cannot be oppressed, because there are no more Indians left. Only a few live in reservations, which are still under discussion. Thousands of dollars must be invested [words indistinct]. Those laws are unfair. They are anti-immigrant laws. I do not think that it is an example for the world, or that it is a good example [words indistinct]. It is a wall between Latin America and the United States, there on the Mexican border, where the Mexicans try to cross from one part of their territory to the part of the territory that was taken from them 100-odd years ago in that famous war that they waged, an expansion war [word indistinct] history. The poverty and exploitation of the people there is known. This wall is 300 times bigger than the Berlin Wall, and it is more sophisticated. People die there every day, trying to cross over the wall; and more means and techniques are used every day while poverty, unemployment, and misery increase [words indistinct] and Latin America compel them to immigrate. That is an economic immigration because they have no way of solving their problems.

When one reads press dispatches, one can see how some people believe they can rule the world. According to a press dispatch, several days ago ... [rephrases] actually, a press dispatch released several days ago, the U.S. Government sent 40 agents to guarantee the security of the Haitian president. Haiti was invaded not long ago and now they must send -- since it is so difficult to rule the world -- 40 agents to defend those tasked with guarding the president's life. It is as if tomorrow, they decided to send 40 officers to protect our lives. I am so happy that they are trying to protect the life of the Haitian president, whom I deem to be a fine person and who leads a very poor and (?unstable) country, one with many problems. However, this is only a glaring example of what ruling the world is all about. If they continue on the same path, they will end up sending more security agents to protect the lives of many presidents in many countries. Is this the right way of guaranteeing peace and human progress?

For years, they have armed to the teeth military governments that seized power through coup d'etats. Now, they are discussing the sale of sophisticated weapons to Latin American countries. On the one hand, we have the UN intervention every time there is a war, a skirmish, any sort of problem, or a crisis; and on the other, we have weapons manufacturers trying to sell as many weapons as possible. Is this sale of weapons made to countries that lack hospitals and schools, countries that must then reduce the number of teachers, hospitals, and schools an attempt to globalize the world economy and increase competition? This is a true contradiction and the United States truly needs its security agents. The United States needs them so that small planes will not crash against the White House and so that people will not shoot at the White House from the sidewalk. [words indistinct] What I want to say, in two words, is that the United States must rule itself better before thinking about ruling the world. I can assure you that no one can rule the world. [applause]

Although I have taken longer than I thought, I do not want to leave out something: I want to let you know that I am pleased, grateful, and appreciative of what you have done and what you are doing. Recalling Cuba's actions in matters of solidarity, I was remembering that our revolutionary people have practiced their solidarity on a large scale. More than 500,000 Cubans have participated in international missions. [Twelve-second break in reception] More than 15,000 Cuban doctors have participated in international missions in the most distant and difficult places. I still remember that when Nicaragua needed teachers, we asked for volunteers, and 30,000 teachers came forward. We sent Nicaragua the number they had requested [words indistinct]: 2,000. This all occurred amid the dirty war and when some of those Cuban teachers were killed, another 100,000 Cuban teachers still volunteered to go there. I believe this illustrates the extent of our country's moral and internationalist potential. In addition, approximately 2,000 Cuban soldiers sacrificed their lives in actions linked to internationalist solidarity. We will never forget and today, we feel especially proud of the role played by our combatants in the fight against apartheid and racism. [applause]

The country against which a blockade is being imposed was the only one whose children fought [words indistinct]. No one ever mentions this. Now, Mandela is a good man. Before, he was bad, a terrible terrorist, who had been sentenced to 26 years... [rephrases] he spent 26 years in jail, but his sentence was still longer than that.

When our men were fighting to defend Angola against the apartheid forces, the Republic of South Africa [RSA] already had seven nuclear warheads. No one ever spoke about that. No one every spoke about the nuclear warheads that the RSA had during the war. Is someone going to tell us now that they did not know that the RSA had nuclear weapons? Since there were Cubans there, some people must have wished the RSA would use their nuclear warheads against the Cubans, however, we sort of felt, we suspected they had nuclear warheads and we took the necessary measures in case they used them. We took all the measures and provisions to prevent them from inflicting more damage and even to prevent them from reaching our troops. No one talks about that.

I was thinking about those things. I was reflecting on that while you were talking. I recalled those days. I am thinking that what you are doing today is a great encouragement for us. It makes us feel more satisfied about the principles for which the revolution has stood in the course of these 35 years. You are not talking about a blockade imposed on a selfish country. You are talking about a blockade imposed on a generous people. [Words indistinct] in different countries of the world. The policy of our people has not been one of selfishness, which is really what has been prevailing among politicians. Today an economic and political doctrine has been imposed on the world. That is why we were thinking that we do not have to be ashamed of the role we have played. At least everything you are doing for us is something that is in keeping with our history and with our conscience. I met with you a few days ago. Some of you had to return but the first day you arrived I really admired the noble feelings that left in me an unforgettable impression. I met many men and women from the two countries. I met the youngest and the oldest. I say people of all ages in between, some were almost adolescents, others were older adults. I saw people of different churches; some were nonbelievers. Perhaps the nonbelievers did not know that Lucius was bringing nonbelievers, too. [sentence as heard] I feel so much respect for Lucius, I do not know if I should address Lucius as you or sir [tu o usted]. It would be more respectful of me perhaps to call him by his last name, but I prefer to call him by his first name. He mentioned the hundreds of thousands of people who cooperated with you as the caravan passed. There is something I cannot forget. I believe it reflects what you are. When you were shaking hands with me, before I could say a word, you said thank you, thank you for the struggle of the Cuban people, thank you for your resistance. I have never seen anything like that. At a moment when we were supposed to say thank you, you were the ones thanking us. What an example of humility that is. [applause]

The list I have with me here, the list of the computers you brought for medical purposes is being checked out by our comrades. A total of 45 computers will be delivered to the emergency rooms of our polyclinics. We will deliver 169 computers to municipal drug stores because that combines medical care with [words indistinct]. The doctors will immediately know where patients can locate the drug or medication and the people will be able to look for their medicine there. We will allocate 41 computers for hospitals in rural areas. We have allocated 20 computers for municipal data centers. Sometimes I cannot read the person's handwriting on this list. Sometimes the five looks like a six and the two looks like an eight. I have not added the figures yet. Yes. The others, 160 computers, will go to the data network. The computers have already been allocated for the different institutions. We will have to see how we are doing in terms of spare parts. They will need maintenance. We will need to see how we will keep them in good shape. Perhaps a good day, a caravan will bring spare parts for these computers. [applause]

Let us congratulate brother Lucius and the brothers and sisters involved in this task for their great example they have given to the world. They have really enhanced our conviction that this hard struggle waged with the weapons of principles and morals, will be won. Ethics, morals, and faith cannot be destroyed by anything. [applause]

They may destroy cities, they may kill, but they will never be able to remove the values which we have been building on from our hearts.

I congratulate you for this magnificent interpretation which you have done of the Scriptures. Those principles, those interpretations cannot be destroyed. I congratulate you brothers and sisters of the Pastors for Peace movement from the United States and Canada. I congratulate you all and I would like to convey to you my deepest recognition and our everlasting gratitude. We will win! [applause]Comrades of the presidency [applause], dear CDR [Committees for the Defense of the Revolution] members of Sancti Spiritus and Cuba [applause]: Do not tell me you cannot hear me. [laughter heard in the background] Oh, well. The fault would not be mine; it would be the people who set up the loudspeakers in this square. [laughter heard in the background] I traveled several hours along this highway and, luckily, it is in very good shape; and it reaches Sancti Spiritus. It should go all the way to Santiago de Cuba. Part of it is already built, but I do not want to stop and explain the factors that delayed the construction. Therefore, it is not so difficult to travel to Sancti Spiritus. I came discreetly; actually, I came in complete silence. I warned no one. [laughter heard in the background] Not even [CDR National Coordinator Juan] Contino or [word indistinct]. [applause] It is not like me to be a conspirator. In recent days, you insisted that I participate in this event. I decided to surprise you -- them and you. [applause]

It is not that my presence is so important [muffled shouts heard in the background], but I wanted to express my feelings of affection and admiration for this province. [applause] I know this is how you see this visit. Sancti Spiritus did not get to host the 26th [July anniversary of the attack on the Moncada barracks] [applause, shouts heard in the background], but it got to host the 28th [September anniversary of the CDR]. [applause] It almost got to host the 26th given its excellent work (in this period). Now it hosts the CDR national ceremony. How could we not exert an effort, how could we not understand the comrades' wish for our presence in this event? I truly believe you deserve every recognition. [applause]

The province deserves it; the CDR deserve it; so this event is a recognition to both -- the CDR and Sancti Spiritus. [applause] It is a pleasure to know how you worked and the results you achieved. The province figured extraordinarily in the sugarcane harvest; it finished the harvest in time, in good time, which has allowed it to work in the crops. The province noticeably increased its tobacco production -- another important product for export and consumption. The province has considerably increased its tubers and vegetables production. The province is considerably increasing the rice production. The province figured prominently in the struggle for efficiency; the struggle for the consolidation of the achievements of the revolution; the struggle to lift the morale and spirit; and the struggle to guarantee the coordination of all the factors dealing directly with the interests of the community and the people. The province has achieved success in so many things that they would be too long to list. [applause]

The province has become the source of inspiration for other provinces and a center of experience that others try to use. The province, it can be said, has been a vanguard during these extraordinarily difficult times. It is proving what can be done in the midst of the special period; and it has bolstered the masses' enthusiasm. This cannot possibly be forgotten on a day like this, and how satisfying it is to be united with the country's recognition for the way in which the party, the mass organizations, and the institutions have worked. In addition, it is such a decisive issue that it cannot be termed otherwise, you achieved first place in this anniversary and you earned the right to host [the event marking] the 28 September [anniversary].

This speech would be too long -- I thought from the beginning that it should be a discreet and brief presentation -- if we listed too many figures, both on the efficient [word indistinct], reflected by the fact that you obtained the highest recovery rate in the last 22 sugarcane harvests, the highest yield in the last (11) harvests, the highest use of the industrial capability in the sugarcane sector -- the highest in the country's history. That is why I say it would be too long to list too many details and figures, the ones Contino talked about when he referred to the statistics, which deal with specific facts.

This vanguard CDR has done a great job nationwide. This is confirmed by the fact that in addition to other provinces Sancti Spiritus is struggling in a very tight competition to be chosen as the site for the main 26 July ceremony.

Contino referred to the work carried out by the CDRs. He was telling us about the blood donations. More than 500,000 donations! An historic record. As he justly recognized, this was accomplished through the work of many people. We know, however, that the CDRs are basically responsible for the blood donations. He mentioned a figure in his speech. What are 508,000 donations? How much are they worth? We cannot calculate their value. In some countries, a donation is worth $200. This has always been a big problem; obtaining blood for health purposes. What basic price should we multiply by 508,000 to know the value of those donations? By 100? If we want to determine their material value abroad -- taking into consideration the quality of our blood, the measures taken to guarantee its usefulness and its cleanliness to make sure that it is not contaminated -- if we multiply those donations by 200, they would be worth $200 million. That's the value. We are not saying that there is a market. If we multiply them by 100, they would be worth $50 million; if we multiply them by 50, they would be worth $25 million. We cannot, however, measure in millions, or in money, the value of a blood donation.

You have talked about the struggle against vices, tendencies, dangers, and so forth; about the struggle against criminals and thieves. In this case, however, we are talking about the enormous struggle against sickness that takes the lives of human beings. In this case we are not trying to save a television set or a radio or clothing that was stolen. In this case we are trying to save lives, by giving hundreds of thousands of persons the opportunity to recover their health. Our country produces hundreds of thousands, more than 500,000 [units not specified]; I believe that the amount reached 800,000 minor and major operations. There are hundreds of thousands that need donations, in some form or another: concentrated red corpuscles, plasma, or whole blood. Our industry processes a large part of that blood. Concentrated red corpuscles are very important in an operation. Many patients need them when they undergo surgery, and sometimes they need them in large amounts, because without them they would not survive.

Can you imagine how many lives the CDRs save each year through their efforts to obtain blood donations? Our country is among the nations with the highest percentage of donations, and perhaps the highest of all if we take into consideration that our donors do not receive any material compensation, and that their attitude is absolutely voluntary, generous, and fraternal. Think about that. The lives that are literally saved. Some of the products that are made with part of those donations also save lives and difficult situations, and in some cases help many people recover their health. We should not only value lives, but human health as well. This is a reflection based on statistics, which can say more and express much more than simple statistical data. Always bear this in mind every time you are urging, convincing, and persuading our compatriots in that beautiful task.

By the way, I asked until what age people could donate blood. I was told that from 14 [unidentified person corrects him saying: "18 years old"] from 18 to 65. Therefore, I was left out [laughter], but there are blood donations [words indistinct] [applause]. I have not done it faithfully, but I have done it several times. Each time there was a problem, every time there was a major problem somewhere in the world, which made it necessary to start a movement and encourage donations... [pauses] some cases were mentioned here, like the case of Peru, but there were also donations after an earthquake in Armenia; there were donations after the earthquake an Iran; there have been several donations, several special donations, when there have been catastrophes in other countries. Those donations have reflected a high level of internationalism and generosity. I think I was still able to participate in one of the last ones. I had to argue. I said: If my blood is not good it can be discarded, but I want to contribute with a blood donation. [applause]

I do not think it is a matter of whether or not the blood of those who are over 65 is good. I believe it is a matter of [words indistinct] and even those in the CDR should know that it should be in order not to risk lives [words indistinct] if we are told that you are not eligible because your blood is not good after you reach 70, what should a man do? What should he do if his blood is refused? If we do not have good blood, how can we be revolutionaries? [applause]

Because the blood should not only remain unadulterated by a virus or by other elements. It should be ideologically unadulterated. [applause] And it should remain free of idleness, weakness, or weariness. It should have been made immune by the lack of revolutionary resources that should still accompany all of us, the true revolutionaries, to our graves, regardless of how long we may live. [applause]

And these are the (donations) we were talking about. There were 8,000 in 1962. They keep growing in number each year as awareness is being forged year after year. In addition, facilities and blood banks keep increasing as the population increases. The almost steep growth in the number of blood donations is noteworthy, ranging from 8,000 in 1962 to 508,000 in 1996. Nevertheless, there exists a special situation, which Contino was pointing out: [this occurs] during the most difficult days of the special period when our people are lacking the food resources that they had 20, 15, or even 10 years ago. Therefore, this situation should also be greatly taken into consideration. Contino spoke about how surveillance has increased in the struggle to defend the revolution and in the fight against crime. He mentioned the modest drop in crime. However, even though he mentioned a modest drop in crime in the communities, almost 10 percent, which is a true achievement, a great success, and a reason for satisfaction. Nevertheless, he prudently warned us that we should not now rest on our laurels. We must intensify and improve this work. We cannot allow criminals to become stronger and to prevail because of their force. We cannot allow criminals to win the battle against society.

The fight against crime goes hand in hand with the fight for legality and for respect for law because it actually hurts to see what a certain number of people are doing with the resources that the revolution has given them, like the homes the revolution has provided them, which is not done elsewhere in the world. More than 80 percent of the population have become home owners because of urban reform laws. There are circumstances in which generosity, as a paradox, harms because the revolution provides basic services ranging from national defense, obviously with all of the people's assistance, to public health, which is tragically not provided everywhere in the world, including the United States despite its wealth. In spite of all of the limitations and thanks to the human efforts you are making along with our doctors, nurses, and health personnel, our country... [pauses] We do not charge a single penny for all of these services.

Neither do we do charge anyone for an education, which demands so many resources and efforts from our country. Our people receive a great deal! For this reason, there are some individuals who take advantage by not working because their basic needs are guaranteed. In addition, there is a social security system to protect any helpless child, any elderly person, anyone, or any family who is in need. Those irregularities are not going to discourage the revolution. On the contrary, they will serve to raise the level of political education and social awareness of our citizens. That is why the struggle for legality, in which the CDR plays a vital role, is so important. What services are not rendered by the CDR to the country? The CDR is present in all fields: in the mobilizations to pick coffee, or to support the harvest, or to clean sugarcane and other crops, which are activities that require a good dose of effort and personal sacrifice.

What Contino was mentioned here previously is the struggle for food and production during the special period, the development of centers for fish production, and the planting of trees for timber and vegetables. There is not a single activity that can be carried out without the CDR's. Our electoral process is so democratic that it cannot be found elsewhere in the world, ranging from the very important way in which candidates are nominated to the way in which authorities are elected at the various municipal, provincial, and national levels. How could this be achieved without the CDR's, including the fight against natural disasters, and particularly, the political struggle to defend the revolution and to create awareness?

When I observe you here today and watch how you react to each idea and lofty thought, believe me, I am proud to see what you have become today. As a necessity, this crowd should remind us of that month of January after the victory of the revolution, when we went through Sancti Spiritus. Maybe this huge crowd today does not know where it occurred or in which park or which plaza. We must remember that on 28 January, 36 years ago, the need to create this organization was proclaimed. We must also remember the fervor it exemplifies. Today we may describe as impressive the nearly total awareness that exists amid an organization to which approximately 90 percent of this country's adult or young citizens belong. This total awareness can be observed in these people here who represent the results of education, not only of general education, but also of political and revolutionary education.

This awareness, which can be felt here, is perhaps one of the most wonderful fruits of the revolution, regardless of the things we have yet to perfect, regardless of the defects we may still have, regardless of the work that lies ahead. This awareness is needed today more than ever. There was talk here about the 100th anniversary of the fall in combat of Antonio Maceo, the 100th anniversary of the fall of (Trasintan), as has been said, a patriot who participated in the three wars of independence that took place last century.

That obedience that Contino recalled when ordered to continue, we can say that Sancti Spiritus has continued the path of (Trasintan). [applause] But the people of Cuba have continued the path of (Trasin), Maceo, Marti, Agramonte, of all those great and illustrious men whom we remember with pride and constantly. [applause] We also remember that we will continue the path of those who throughout this century fought, sacrificed, many of whom gave their lives in fulfilling their duty to defend the fatherland and the revolution. In sad times, many of them fell without seeing the country totally free, during both last century and this century.

[words indistinct] January have fought and have fallen and have paid the ultimate sacrifice for a completely free and independent fatherland, so free, so independent, and so strong that the revolution was capable of withstanding the catastrophes that affected and destroyed the Socialist bloc, including the Soviet Union. And we have demonstrated that we were capable of resisting that, which joined the merciless imperialist blockade, which has lasted as long or longer than when the first CDRs emerged. By that time, we were already facing strong hostility. We were under tremendous pressure that included economic measures, subversive plans, counterrevolutionary actions, bomb explosions. These actions have continued, in some form or another, these past years.

The revolution is so strong, so independent, and so firm that it has withstood all that, it has resisted the special period, and it continues to resist. And it is resisting new blockade laws, such as the Torricelli Law, with its two famous tracks. One track aimed to starve us to death and the other aims to force us to nibble around the edges of the contemptuous Yankee imperialism. The revolution is so strong and firm that we are facing that cruel and evil law called Helms-Burton Act, which has elicited so much rejection in the world. This represents an attempt to dictate laws on other countries and seek that these countries observe those laws. We cannot underestimate the harm that all those measures do to us; the obstacles they pose to our development, and the ways and means in which they attempt to hamper the financing that our country needs for economic recovery. We were badly hurt by the disappearance of the Socialist bloc and the Soviet Union, and now we must contend with the pressures exerted on investors, which today we need as part of the revolutionary strategy to preserve the country's independence and the conquests of the revolution.

We have resisted all those measures and we continue to resist because the greater the aggression the greater the creativity from the people and the revolution; the greater the blockade the harder the work done, the stronger the quest for efficiency. That is why we recently said that no country under such difficult conditions could have done what we have done, could have resisted what we have resisted. No country could have done so much with so little. When I say little, I mean the few resources that the country has. And I mentioned that not one single school was closed, but a few more were opened, and [words indistinct] but more jobs were opened, and not one polytechnic school was closed, and not one single doctor was laid off. On the contrary, there were more doctors every year. Just look at the tremendous work being carried out by family doctors, with whom you maintain close cooperation. Today, everyone and every institution is carrying out a great effort to seek more coordination, more cooperation in order to resolve many problems that even during the special period could be resolved. Part of these problems are being resolved and many others must be resolved, even under these circumstances, which makes men of young boys. We have been working with half the fuel we have had historically. We have been working practically with half the equipment we have had historically, namely after the revolution, in the 1980's before this new situation emerged.

The country is carrying out an effort, creating an awareness about unity and cooperation. [words indistinct] not one problem forgotten, not one problem without solution, not one community with specific problems that have to do more with the effort of men. And even the resources we do have are scarce.

It is an objective reality. Resources are scarce, and they will continue to be scarce. However, we will continue our economic recovery. It will take time. Under the conditions in which the country is being forced to work, it would be a mistake to have the illusion that we will progress swiftly in a very short period of time. What kind of country would we have without the blockade, with the virtues we have acquired these many years, particularly in recent years? They have done harm to us, but at the same time we have learned much.

I take advantage of this opportunity to alert you to any tendency to imagine that the difficulties and shortages are over, or that the resources we have are even similar to what we had 10 years ago, or six years ago. Since each international incident affects us, and since, for electoral reasons, more than any other cause, they bomb Iraq and create tension in the Persian Gulf, the price of oil is increasing. It has increased from $16, $17 to $24 or $23. It has increased 20 to 30 percent. Each liter of fuel not produced here must be imported and paid for at those high prices. The price of food in general has also increased, from wheat to rice. Sometimes it is even hard to find a simple bag of rice. That is why your efforts in the southern part of the province are so important. We must feel encouraged and satisfied by what we have been able to recover, because today we are working with more efficiency. At the same time, however, we must beware the tendency to believe that road ahead is coming up roses. There is a strategic path toward the roses [words indistinct] our confidence in victory, or in the verses of that anthem that says that our history will grow. Yes, no one should ever doubt it! [applause] Our history has grown and will continue to grow. Our history will not stop, and it will not be crushed by any means, because we have a force and an extraordinary resource. That force, and that resource is man. [applause] To prevent any misunderstanding, when I say man I also mean women. [applause] I mean citizens, patriots, revolutionaries; people, most of whom are enthusiastic, patriotic, and revolutionary. [applause] We must take care of that resource, the most valuable one. Without our people, this country would not have been able to accomplish the feat it is currently accomplishing. Without our people, five years after the special period, we would not have this enormous, conscious, and courageous massive meeting here in Sancti Spiritus. [applause] Without our conscious, courageous, and [words indistinct] people, the Empire would have destroyed the dreams of those who preceded us, of the illustrious men and the great combatants, the heroic men of [word indistinct] of our struggles and our heroic deeds. They tried to swallow us, but we refused to let them swallow us; they tried to annex us, and we said no. The people those days, who were not yet united, when the revolutionaries were probably not a majority yet, said no, and we did not become an annex. They are still trying to swallow us, they still want to annex us, they still want us to be a property of the Empire. This generation, however, our people who have a high awareness, more awareness than ever, say no, and they will not be able to do it. They will not be able to swallow them, they will not be defeated. I believe that today, Cuba is showing the world today that the power of the Empire is not what counts, nor its sophisticated weapons, nor its wealth. What really counts, regardless of the size -- and we are not that small -- what really counts is the determination to fight, the heroism and awareness of the people.

The Empire wants to govern the world and the world is not theirs to govern. The conflicts and problems that arise everywhere have their origin in the poverty imposed by colonialism. The problems of hunger, sickness, instability, which are seen every day in newspapers and on television, are problems that exist in the world, but that do not exist here in Cuba. These problems show the failure of imperialist policies -- the increasing discontent of the people, the impossibility to make them submit. Cuba's example is like a star high in the sky. Cuba is a brilliant star that cannot be extinguished and that serves as an inspiration and as an example. When we struggle here and resist here, we are struggling and resisting not only for ourselves, but for all the peoples of the world. [applause]

How can one explain that a country, such as the United States, the world's richest nation, reduces the social security benefits to its citizens? How can one explain why tens of millions of people have had their medical benefits reduced? How can one explain reductions to the education budget? How can one explain the drop in social benefits to U.S. workers and the U.S. people, which they gained bit by bit over the past 50 years? How can one explain that this does not mean a failure of the system? The system has created hatred against immigrants and fear of immigrants.

After impoverishing the world, three-fourths of the world -- a fourth of the world has been saved as they are developed countries -- in which hundreds of millions of human beings -- Indians, Africans, Asians -- were sacrificed to be able to amass that wealth, now they are terrified of the poverty they have created.

Even the World Bank talks about social problems, and it is part of the social problems. The IMF does the same thing. The main world financial organizations are controlled by the imperialists who recommend reductions in the health, education, and social security budgets. They impose policies that compound the problems of poverty and unemployment. How are immigration phenomena not to take place? Despite of the fact they talked so much about the Berlin Wall, they are building a similar wall on the Mexican border or, better said, within Mexican territory, because that side of the border was also Mexican territory. It was Mexican territory until they took it away from Mexico in an unjust and cruel war. They are building there a wall 100 times bigger than the Berlin Wall, where every day people who try to cross that border sustain accidents, are mistreated, or are even killed. They come from Central America, South America, and many parts of the world.

They are now terrorized over this phenomenon. A similar situation is taking place in Europe. This situation has given rise to the emergence of feelings of xenophobia, of hatred against immigrants. This is the system that they defend. This is the system to whose principles they would like us to adhere. And it is necessary that each of our compatriots understand this, like the immense majority of the people today understand. Anyone can understand that the most terrible thing that could happen to anyone who knew independence, liberty, justice, and dignity would be to have to live in societies like those, not even societies like those, in poor societies with that philosophy, with that lack of dignity, honor. They have imposed these types of societies on many peoples of the world, societies that are at the very root of the instability and conflict we see all over the world.

Next to this, our country is a sea of peace and union! Our country is a sea of agreement with the objectives that are pursued. We must realize that beyond the material difficulties, there are elements associated to the soul of men, to the conscience of men, to the moral dignity of men that can never be ignored. Those who they force to live like animals or those who resign themselves to living like animals, do not deserve to be called men.

History has known all sorts of injustices for centuries, thousands of years, beginning with slavery, which lasted in Cuba until a little over 100 years ago. Look at how long, how many centuries, even millenniums, injustice prevailed. When one is able to reach this dream of liberty, independence, justice, and dignity, one cannot take a step backward -- never. And I say this with sincerity: It would be 10,000 times better to die. [applause]

Our enemies know that these [words indistinct] people who would rather die than return to the past. And they must know the price they would have to pay if they attempt to make us return to that past. [applause] We carry our difficulties and shortages with honor, with the dignity of those who did not give up. [applause] With the dignity of those who will never kneel. [applause]

This is what I wanted to say to you, my dear CDR members, my dear compatriots from Sancti Spiritus and Cuba. [applause] That is why once more and with pride and with great satisfaction, like the satisfaction we have had this afternoon, I say: Socialism or death. Fatherland or death. We will win!
As many of you probably know, tonight we were going to unfold a program which we felt would be beneficial to the struggle of our people in this country. But because of events which are beyond our control we feel that it is best to postpone unfolding the program that we had in mind until a later date.
Sunday morning about three oclock, somebody threw some bombs inside my house.

Normally I wouldnt get excited over a few bombs, but the ones who threw these not only aimed them in rooms where therewhere there was no one, but even in rooms where three of my daughters sleep. One daughter six, one daughter four, and one daughter two. And since I am, am quite certain that those who threw the bombs knew my house well enough to know where everyone was sleeping, I cant quite bring my heart to the point where it can in any way be merciful, or from now on compromising, toward anyone who can be that low. Especially when I heard on the news today that Joseph, a brother that I found in the garbage can in Detroit in 1952thats where I found himmade the statement that I had bombed my own house.

Now you see, this doesnt surprise me, because I know that since many of us left the Muslim movement, its intelligence and its morals have gone bankrupt. Both its intelligence and its morals have gone bankrupt.

And now they are using the same tactics thats used by the Ku Klux Klan. When the Klan bombs your church, they say you did it. When they bomb the synagogue, they say the Jews bombed their own synagogue. This is a Klan tactic. And to me, Ill tell you why the Black Muslim movement is now adopting the same tactic against Black people as has been up to now the exclusive method of the Ku Klux Klan.

I want to point out, too, that Im not talking about Muslims just to make white people happy. Because I dont believe in letting anyone use me against somebody else. Im telling you these things because I have reached a point where I feel that Black people in this country need to know whats going on. And Im talking about an organization which I had a hand in building, which I had a hand in organizing. I know its characteristics. I know its potential. I know its behavior patterns. I know what it can do and what it cannot do. One of the things it can do is bomb your house and try to kill your baby.

Before we get into it, I would like to point out also, as many of you know, last Tuesday, or last weekend, I was invited to address the first congress of the Council of African Organizations in London. They had a four-day congress on the 5th, 6th, 7th and 8th and had invited me there to make the closing address and bring the delegates from the various African organizations that are situated on the European continent up to date in regards to the struggle of the Black man in this country in his quest for human rights and human dignity. And in it conjunction with that invitation, I had gotten an invitation to visit Paris from the Afro-American community in Paris, which was sponsoring a rally in conjunction with the African community. And I was supposed to go there Tuesday also and address them and let them know the state of development or lack of development of our progress in this country for human rights, or toward human rights.

As many of you know, when I got to Paris, the man said I couldnt come insome man. French man. They gave me no explanation other than that theywe have our own. They wouldnt let me phone the American embassy. And they tried to imply that the American embassy was behind it, whichI told them that I didnt know de Gaulle had become a satellite of Lyndon B. Johnson. I knew that Kennedy had made a satellite out of Khrushchev and half ofand Britainand half of these other countries, and I didnt think that France was a satellite of the United States.

Well, it made them angry because they like to be independent, you knowor pretend to be independent. But they wouldnt let me in. They wouldnt let me phone the American embassy.
And later on, when I got back in Londonand by the way, when I got back to London there was about twenty different delegates who were delegates from about twenty different African organizations on hand at the airport, and they were going to raise hell if anything had happened other than what should have happened. As it was, I ended backI re-entered England with no trouble and immediately got in telephone contact with the brothers and sisters who were in Paris. And they pointed out that they had encountered some difficulty, first from the Communist trade union workers. Now mind you, Communist trade union workers had prevented them from renting their hall, and when they went to get another hall the same Communist group had exercised its influence to prevent them from getting that hall.

Finally, when they did get a hall, evidently someone was strong enough to exercise influence over the French government. And I might add that while I was in custody of the French, every time I made a request, before they would say yes or no, they telephoned the French foreign ministry. So that they were taking their orders from someone high up in the French foreign ministry who did not want me to enter France. And theres a reason for it. I dont blame them, because and I told the parties thereI said maybe my plane got mixed up and I was in South Africa, in the wrong country. This couldnt be Paris, it must be Johannesburg. And they got red. And you know how they can get red. One of them was pink.

The same thing happened in England, as many of you probably read in the Sunday Times and the Tribune. There was a great fear in England concerning me speaking to the West Indian community. And becausethis is because England has a very serious color problem developing, because so many of our people are migrating there from the British West Indies. France, quietly as it is kept, has a very serious color problem developing because of the migration to France of our people from the French West Indies. And with these people from the French West Indies, Black people going to France, others from the British West Indies going to England, coupled with the Asians who are coming from the Commonwealth territory, along with the Africans from French Equatorial West Africa into France, and the British possessions into Britain, theres a large, increasing number of dark-skinned people swelling the dark population of France and Britain. And its giving them a great deal of horror of the worldthe only difference over there and over here being that no one of black skin in France has ever tried to unite the dark-skinned people together. Neither have they done so in England. So you can somewhat see what their fear is.

No effort has been made to unite the Afro-American community or the American Negro community with the West Indian community and then those two communities with the African community, and both communities with the Asian community. This has never been done, in neither England or France. But when I was in France in November just for a few days, I was successful in getting a few of the Afro-Americans who live there together, and they formed a branch of the OAAU, the Organization of Afro-American Unity. And as soon as they formed this branch, they began to work in conjunction with the African organization and became a power that had to be reckoned with. And this is what the French government did not want.

Also the same thing in Britain. The West Indian community is very restless, or rather, yes, restless and dissatisfied. And they too are trying to organize or find someone who can bring them together. And this has caused in England a great deal of fear, a great deal of concern. And the effect of it is that it makes them act in a very silly way sometimes. Now, to leave that for a moment, as youll recall, when I was in Mecca in September, I wrote back a letter which was printed in The New York Times in which I pointed out that it was my intention when I returned to expose Elijah Muhammad as a religious faker. This is what I wrote. Now, while I was in Mecca among the Muslims, I had a chance to meditate and think and see things with a great deal of claritywith much greater clarity than Ive achieved from over here, entangled with all this mess that we are confronted by constantly. And I had made up my mind, yes, that I was going to tell the Black people in the Western Hemisphere, who I had played a great role in misleading into the hands of Elijah Muhammad, exactly what kind of man he was and what he was doing.

And I might point out right here that it was not a case of my knowing all the time, because I didnt. I had blind faith in him, the same as many of you have had and still have blind faith in me or blind faith in Moses or blind faith in somebody else. My faith in Elijah Muhammad was more blind and more uncompromising than any faith that any man has ever had for another man. And so I didnt try to see him as he actually was. But, being away, I could see him better, understand many things better. And, well, when I came back to this country, as you recall, I was very quiet. I knew the best thing was when they tried to ask me questions about him, I ducked it. I didnt want to get involved. I didnt want to get into it. Well, the reason for that was this: The letter that I wrote was written when I was in Arabia, in September, whereas, after leaving Arabia I had gone into Africa. I had had an opportunity to hold long discussions with President Julius Nyerere in what is now Tanzania; with Jomo Kenyatta, the president of Kenya, the Republic of Kenya; long discussions with Prime Minister Milton Obote of Uganda; President Azikiwe of Nigeria; President Nkrumah of Ghana; and President Sekou Toure in Guinea. And the understanding that I had in conversations with these men is that they are great men.

The understanding that I got broadened my scope so much that I felt I could see the problems and complaints of Black people in America and the Western Hemisphere with much greater clarity.
And I felt foolish coming back to this country and getting into a little two-bit argument with some bird-brained person who calls himself a Black Muslim. I felt I was wasting my time. I felt it would be a drag for me to come back here and allow myself to be in a whole lot of public arguments and physical fisticuffsknowing what I knew, and knowing that it would actually be more beneficial to our people if a constructive program were put in front of them immediately.

Many of you will recall that shortly after I came back, despite the fact that I said nothing about the Black Muslims, a wire was put in the newspaper under the name of Raymond Sharrieff threatening me if I were to say anything about Elijah Muhammad. Actually that wasnt Raymond Sharrieffs wire, that was Elijah Muhammads wire. Raymond Sharrieff has no words of his own.

If you recall, when I was in the Black Muslim movement, I never said anything without saying Elijah Muhammad seems to believe thus and so, or Elijah Muhammad said thus and so. This is the way the Black Muslim movement is organized. Nobody makes any public statement unless it comes from Elijah Muhammad. And nobody makes any move unless it comes from Elijah Muhammad. They didnt do it then and they dont do it now. So, when Raymond Sharrieff put that letter in the paperthat wire, rather, in the paperthat wire was from Elijah Muhammad himself. And he was trying to irk me into saying something so that a public hullabaloo would take place again because they wanted to jockey me into the same position I was in before I left the country. Before I left the country, I had permitted them to jockey me into a positionme and the good brothers and sisters who also had sense enough to leave from down thereI was foolish enough to let them jockey me into a position where we were taking potshots at each other, so to speak, and it was known throughout the country that the Muslims in the temple were trying to do this thing.

So it put me in a spot where anybody could do it and then blame it on those foolish Muslims. And I was well aware of this. So, by staying away for four or five months, that ended. But when I came back, being quiet, they wanted the same thing again. They wanted some more hullabaloo so that it would appear that the Black Muslims were going to do this and the Black Muslims were going to do that and then anybody could do it and blame those fools and they wouldnt have sense enough to see it. You can understand that cant you? And when I say anybody, I mean anybody. But I know who those anybodies are.

I continue to concentrate, continue to ignore them and concentrate on trying to get the Organization of Afro- American Unity better organized. Because I knew that and I felt that what it had in mind would actually solve the problems of many of our peoplemost of our people.

If youll notice and, but despite the fact that I tried to keep quiet, on January 22 I came out of my house one night and they jumped me, on a Friday night, about 11:15. Now, I knew that they werent out there waiting for me, because normally I wouldnt come out at that time of the night. So that when I did come out and ran into them and they did jump me, I knew then that they were casing my house. And frankly, I waited for them for a month. Id sit around that house with my rifle; stayed up all times of the night just to get one chance to put somebody in hell. Just one chance. I warned my wife at that time that they were casing the it house. Again, I know their behavior. And I also became more careful, wherever I would go and whenever I would go anywhere. And then to make it worse, when I went to Los Angeles a couple of weeks ago, they had gotten so insane that they chased me right down the Hollywood Freeway in broad daylight. Yes!

Now, the thing that you have to consider about this is, the police were at the airport. The police knew what they were up to. In fact, the police arrested a couple of them in front of someones home the night before. They knew all about it. Nothing was said in the paper. Now, imagine someone is chasing you down the Hollywood Freeway at eighty miles an hour and it doesnt get in the paper. No.

So later onthat was on a Thursday. Friday I was in Chicago. I appeared on the Kup show. And when I went on the Kup show I had about twenty police. There were twenty police out there guarding the station. It might seem odd, but the Muslims were there. And they even tried to attack the police, which was never put in the paper. They followed the police, because of thatthey act kind of nuts. And Im so thankful that Im out of there, I dont expect...because I was the same kind of nut. I was just as nuts as they were. If Elijah Muhammad had told me to go get somebodys head, I would have gone and gotten it just like that. And thats whats the matter with them. Theyre only following what I taught them how to do. So, I understand.

But despite the fact that they put on this performance, it was quieted down. Nothing was said about it. And then the night I was on the Susskind show, the David Susskind Show, those same persons werehad surrounded the station. They had even almost strong-armed the police. The police didnt do a thing to strike back at them. They almost strong-armed them. Nothing was done about that. But while I was on the show they had come to the studio and told Susskind that I wasnt going to be down there that night. And told him that I would never make it. But, again, I know how they do, and I, thanks to Allah, did something other than what they expected.

So, the next thing that irritated them and irritated them the most was this. And Ive been doing it for a month, and nobody knew why I was doing it. You notice, I had shifted my attack from them to Rockwell and the Ku Klux Klan. For the past month Ive been beating on the Klan and beating on Rockwell and beating on these so-called rightwingers. You may wonder why. I sent a wire to Rockwell warning him if anything happened to Black people in Alabama that we would give him maximum retaliation. The press knew it. You heard nothing it about it. Rockwell disappeared because hes scared of power like anybody else. Because they know that he has strength only as long as hes dealing with somebody thats nonviolent. Good Lord. Rockwell and his whole crowd agree only as long as theyre dealing with someone nonviolent. The Ku Klux Klan and that crowd agree only when theyre dealing it with someone nonviolent. Citizens Council and that crowd agree only when theyre dealing with someone thats nonviolent. And you know it.

So, he cleared out. I went to Alabama. I went to Alabama purposely to see what was happening down there. While I was there, I wasnt trying to interfere with Kings program, whatever it was. He was in jail. I talked, I spoke it at Tuskegee. I spoke at Tuskegee Institute last Tuesday night, I think it was. There were over 3,000 students and others. And it was the students themselves that night who insisted that I go with them the next morning to Selma, some students from Smith. So I went. After giving it careful thought, I went.

When I got to Selma, the press began to bug me right it away. And I wouldnt even tell them my name. I just ignored them completely. So they insisted that I hold a press conference. I didnt ask for a press conference. They insisted that I hold a press conference. Which was held. And while the press was there, the Klan was there. When youre looking at the cops in Alabama, youre looking at the Klan. Thats who the Klan is.

Knowing where I was, right then and there, I reminded Lyndon B. Johnson of the promise he had made to good, well-meaning Americans when he was running for president. He said that if he were elected he would pull the sheets off the Ku Klux Klan. Did he not say that? Yes, he did. So, here youve got Klansmen knocking little babies down the road with a...youve got Klansmen knocking Black women down in front of a camera and that poor fool Black man standing on the sidelines because hes nonviolent. Now, we dont go along with a thing like that.

Well, it was then, in Selma, Alabama, in front of the face of the Ku Klux Klan that I demanded in your name, the Organization of Afro-American Unitycould I make that demand in your name? Since 97 percent of the Black people in this country had supported Lyndon B. Johnson and his promise, and now that his party has the largest majority that any president has had in a long time, Lyndon B. Johnson is obligated to the Black man in this country to put up an immediate federal commission to investigate the Ku Klux Klan, which is a criminal organization organized to murder and maim and cripple Black people in this country.

And, I pointed out that if Lyndon B. Johnson could not keep his promise and expose the Ku Klux Klan, then we would be within our rights to come to Alabama and organize the Black people of Alabama and pull the sheets off the Klan ourselves. And we can do it. Brothers and sisters, we can do it. And the federal government wont do it. Since then, theyve been talking about a little investigation of the Klan and the Citizens Council and the Black Muslims and some of the others. But theyre not going to do anything. The only way the Klan is going to be stopped is when you and I organize and stop them ourselves. Yes, thats whats out there.

You may say, well, why am I so down on the Klan all of a sudden? Im going to tell you why. And why did I shift my attack from the Black MuslimsElijah Muhammad and his immoral selfto the Klan? Yes, hes immoral. You cant take nine teenaged women and seduce them and give them babies and not tell me youreand then tell me youre moral. You could do it if you admitted you did it and admitted that the babies were yours. Id shake your hand and call you a man. A good one too. Any time you seduce teenaged girls and make them be with child with adultery, make them hide your crimes, why, youre not even a man, much less a divine man. So, and this is what he did. He took at least nine that we know about. And Im not speculating, because he told this to me himself. Yes, thats why he wants me dead because he knew as soon as I walked out that Id tell it. Nine of them. Not two of them who are suing him, but nine of them. And the FBI knows it. The law in Chicago knows it. The press even knows it. And they dont expose the man.

And dont let me get out of here tonight without telling you why they wont expose him. Why theyre afraid to expose him. They know that if they expose him, that he has them all set. See, the Black Muslim movement, it was organized in such a way that it attracted the most militant, the most uncompromising, the most fearless, and the youngest of the Black people in the United States. Thats who went into it. Those who didnt mind dying. They didnt mind making a sacrifice. All they were interested in was freedom and justice and equality, and they would do anything to see that it was brought about. These are the people who have followed him for the past twelve years. And the government knows it. But all these upfront militants have been held in check by an organization that doesnt take an active part in anything. And therefore it cannot be a threat to anybody because its not going to do anything against anybody but itself.

Dont you know? The way they threw that bomb in there they could have thrown it in a Ku Klux Klan house. Why do they want to bomb my house? Why dont they bomb the Klan? Im going to tell you why.

In 1960, in December, in December of 1960, I was in the home of Jeremiah, the minister in Atlanta, Georgia. Im ashamed to say it, but Im going to tell you the truth. I sat at the table myself with the heads of the Ku Klux Klan. I sat there myself, with the heads of the Ku Klux Klan, who at that time were trying to negotiate with Elijah Muhammad so that they could make available to him a large area of land in Georgia or I think it was South Carolina. They had some very responsible persons in the government who were involved in it and who were willing to go along with it. They wanted to make this land available to him so that his program of separation would sound more feasible to Negroes and therefore lessen the pressure that the integrationists were putting upon the white man. I sat there. I negotiated it. I listened to their offer. And I was the one who went back to Chicago and told Elijah Muhammad what they had offered. Now, this was in December of 1960.

The code name that Jeremiah gave the Klan leader was 666. Whenever they would refer to him they would refer to him as Old Six. What his name was right now escapes me. But they even sat there and told stories howwhat they had done on different escapades that they had been involved in. Jeremiah was there and his wife was there and I was there and the Klan was there.

From that day onward the Klan never interfered with the Black Muslim movement in the South. Jeremiah attended Klan rallies, as you read on the front page of the New York Tribune. They never bothered him, never touched him. He never touched a Muslim, and a Muslim never touched him. Elijah Muhammad would never let me go back down since January of 1961. I never went South, as long as I remained in the Black Muslim movement, again, from January of 1961, because most of the actions the Muslims got involved in was action that I was involved in myself. Wherever it happened in the country, where there was an action, it was action that I was involved in, because I believed in action. I never have gone along with no Ku Klux Klan.

And another one that he had made a deal with was this man Rockwell. Rockwell and Elijah Muhammad are regular correspondents with each other. You can hate me for telling you this, but Im going to tell it to you. Rockwell attended the rally because Elijah Muhammad put the okay on it. And Sharrieff, the captain of the FOI, and I had discussed it, wondering why Rockwell could come to our meeting because it didnt help us. But Elijah Muhammad said let him in, so he had to be let in. No one questioned what Elijah Muhammad said. Now, if you doubt that this is true, you get all of the back issues of Muhammad Speaks newspaper and you will find articles in it about the Ku Klux Klan actually praising him. Jeremiah interviewedI think it wasJ.B. Stoner for the Muslim newspaper, and the old devil even gave him a contribution that he reported about in that paper. Sure he did.

When the brothers in Monroe, Louisiana, were involved in trouble with the police, if youll recall, Elijah Muhammad got old Venable. Venable is the Ku Klux Klan lawyer. Hes a Ku Klux Klan chieftain, according to the Saturday Evening Post, that was up on the witness stand. Go back and read the paper and youll see that Venable was the one who represented the Black Muslim movement in Louisiana.

Now, brothers and sisters, until 1961, until 1960, until just before Elijah Muhammad went to the East, there was not a better organization among Black people in this country than the Muslim movement. It was militant. It made the whole struggle of the Black man in this country pick up momentum because of the unity, the militancy, created by the Muslim movement lent weight to the struggle of the Black man in this country against oppression.

But after 1960, after Elijah Muhammad went over there in December of 59 and came back in January of 60when he came back, the whole trend or direction that he formerly had taken began to change. And in that change theres a whole lot of other things that had come into the picture. But he began to be more mercenary. More interested in money. More interested in wealth And, yes, more interested in girls.

And I guess many of you have heard it said that his financial support comes from a rich man in Texas. I heard that while I was in the movement. Ive heard it more since I left the movement. A rich man in Texas. You can look up, any of you can look up his name. But the FBI knows that too. But they still dont touch him. And never have I seen a manand this rich man who lives in Texas, by the way, lives in Dallas. His headquarters is in Dallas, his money is in Dallas, the same city where President John F. Kennedy was assassinated. And never have I seen a man in my life more afraid, more frightened than Elijah Muhammad was when John F. Kennedy was assassinated. Ive never in my life seen a man as frightened as he was. And when I made the statement that I did, why he almost cracked up behind it because there were all kinds of implications to it that at that time were way above and beyond my understanding.

Now you may wonder, why is it so important to many interests for the Black Muslim movement to remain? But I told you, it has the most militant, most uncompromising, most dissatisfied Black people in America in it. Many have left it, many are still in it. The fear has been that if anything happened to Elijah Muhammad and the Black Muslim movement were to crumble, that all those militants who formerly were in it and were held in check would immediately become involved in the civil rights struggle, and they would add the same kinds of energy to the civil rights struggle that they gave to the Black Muslim movement. And theres a great fear. You know yourself, white people dont like for Black people to get involved in anything to do with civil rights unless those Black people are nonviolent, loving, patient, forgiving, and all of that. They dont like it otherwise.

And there has been a conspiracy across the country on the part of many factions of the press to suppress news that would open the eyes of the Muslims who are following Elijah Muhammad. They continue to make him look like hes a prophet somewhere who is getting some messages direct from God and is untouchable and things of that sort. Im telling you the truth. But they do know that if something were to happen and all these brothers, their eyes were to come open, they would be right out here in every one of these civil rights organizations making these Uncle Tom Negro leaders stand up and fight like men instead of running around here nonviolently acting like women.

So they hope Elijah Muhammad remains as he is for a long time because they know that any organization that he heads, it will not do anything in the struggle that the Black man is confronted with in this country. Proof of which, look how violent they can get. They were violent, theyve been violent from coast to coast. Muslims, in the Muslim movement, have been involved in cold, calculated violence. And not at one time have they been involved in any violence against the Ku Klux Klan. Theyre capable. Theyre qualified. Theyre equipped. They know how to do it. But theyll never do itonly to another brother. Now, I am well aware of what Im setting in motion by what Im saying up here tonight. Im well aware. But I have never said or done anything in my life that I wasnt prepared to suffer the consequences for.

Now, what does this have to do with France, England, the United States? You and I are living at a time when theres a revolution going on. A worldwide revolution. It goes beyond Mississippi. It goes beyond Alabama. It goes beyond Harlem. Theres a worldwide revolution going on. And its in two phases.

Number one, what is it revolting against? The power structure. The American power structure? No. The French power structure? No. The English power structure? No. Then what power structure? An international Western power structure. An international power structure consisting of American interests, French interests, English interests, Belgian interests, European interests. These countries that formerly colonized the dark man formed into a giant international combine. A structure, a house that has ruled the world up until now. And in recent times there has been a revolution taking place in Asia and in Africa, whacking away at the strength or at the foundation of the power structure.

Now, the man was shook up enough when Africa was in revolt and when Asia was in revolt. All of this revolt was actually taking place on the outside of his house, on the outside of his base, or on the outside of his headquarters. But now hes faced with something new. Just as the French and the British and thethe French, and the British, and the Americans formed one huge home or house or power structure, those brothers in Africa and Asia, although they are fighting against it, they also have some brothers on the inside of the house. And as fast as the brothers in Africa and Asia get their independence, get freedom, get strength, begin to rise up, begin to change their image from negative to positive, this African image that has jumped from negative to positive affects the image that the Black man in the Western Hemisphere has of himself.

Whereas in the West Indies and in Latin American countries and in the United States, you or I used to be ashamed of ourselves, used to look down upon ourselves, used to have no tendency whatsoever or desire whatsoever to stick together. As the African nations become independent and mold a new image a positive image, a militant image, an upright image, the image of a man, not a boy. How has this affected the Black man in the Western Hemisphere? It has taken the Black man in the Caribbean and given him some pride. It has given pride to the Black man in Latin America and has given pride to the Black man right here in the United States. So that when the Black revolution begins to roll on the African continent it affects the Black man in the United States and affects the relationship between the Black man and the white man in the United States.

When the Black man in the Caribbean sees the brother on the continent of Africa waking up and rising up, the Black man in the Caribbean begins to throw back his shoulders and stick out his chest and stand up. Now, when that Black man goes to England hes right inside the English power structure, ready to give it trouble. When the Black man from the French West Indies goes to France, why the effect upon him of the African revolution is the same as the effect upon us here in the States by the African revolution. This is what you have to understand.

Now, up to now there have been Black people in France, divided. Black people in England, divided. Black people here in America, divided. What divided us? Our lack of pride. Our lack of racial identity. Our lack of racial pride. Our lack of cultural roots. We had nothing in common. But as the African nation got its independence and changed its image we became proud of it. And to the same degree that we became proud of it we began to have something in common to that same degree. So, whereas formerly it was difficult to unite Black people, today it is easier to unite Black people. Where formerly Black people didnt want to come together with Black people, but only with white people, today you find Black people want to come together with Black people. All they need is someone to start the ball rolling.

So this is what you have to understand. And as the brothers on the African continent lead the way, it has an effect and an impact upon the brothers here, upon the brothers here in the Western Hemisphere. So that when you find the Afro-American community in France uniting not only with itself, but for the first time beginning to unite and work in conjunction with the African community, this frightens old De Gaulle to death, because he sees some new problems in front of him.

And when the Afro and West Indian community, which is an Afro-American community in England, begins to unite and then unite also with the African community in England and reach out and get the Asian community, its trouble for old John Bull. Trouble that he never foresaw before. And this is something that he has to face up to.

Likewise, here in America, with you and me. For the first time in our history here you find we have a tendency to want to come together. For the first time we have a tendency to want to work together. And, up to now, no organization on the American continent has tried to unite you and me with our brothers and sisters back home. At no time. None of them. Marcus Garvey did it. They put him in jail. They framed him. The governmentframed him and put him in jail. Marcus Garvey tried.

The only fear that exists is that you and I once we get united will also unite with our brothers and sisters. And since they knew that my calling in life, as a Muslim number one, Im a Muslim, for which Im proud. And in no way has that changed, my being a Muslim. My religion is Islam. Whats that? [Interjection from audience] Okay. Yall sit down and be cool. Just sit down and be cool.

As a Muslim, when I left the Black Muslim movement, I realized that what we taught in there was not authentic Islam. My first journey was to Mecca to make myself an authentic Muslim. And to bring them there up to date on the problems that our people who are Muslims had. As soon as we established our religious authenticity with the Muslim world, we set up the Organization of Afro-American Unity and took immediate steps to make certain that we would be in direct contact with our African brothers on the African continent. So the first step that has been taken, brothers and sisters, since Garvey died, to actually establish contact between the 22 million Black Americans with our brothers and sisters back home was done by two organizations. Done first by the Muslim Mosque, which gave us direct ties with our brothers and sisters in Asia and Africa who are Muslims. And, you know weve got to unite with them, because there are 700 million Muslims and we surely need to stop being the minority and become part of the majority.

So, as Muslims, we united with our Muslim brothers in Asia and Africa. And as members of the Organization of African, or Afro-American Unity, we set out on a program to unite our people on this continent with our people on the mother continent. And this frightened many powermany interests in this country. Many people in this country who want to see us the minority and who dont want to see us taking too militant or too uncompromising a stand are absolutely against the successful regrouping or organizing of any faction in this country whose thought and whose thinking patterns is international, rather than national. Whose thought patterns, whose hopes and aspirations are worldly rather than just within the context of the United States border or the borderline of the United States.

So this has been the purpose of the OAAU and also the Muslim Mosque to give us direct links, direct contact, direct communication and cooperation with our brothers and sisters all over the earth. And once we are successful in uniting ourselves with our people all over the world, it puts us in a position where we no longer are a minority who can be abused and walked upon. We become a part of the majority. And then if this man over here plays too rough, we have some brothers who can play as rough as he. So thats all I have to say about that.

I wanted you to know that my house was bombed. It was bombed by the Black Muslim movement upon the orders of Elijah Muhammad. And when the bomb was thrown, one of the bombs was thrown at the rear window of my house where my three little baby girls sleep. And I have no compassion or mercy or forgiveness or anything of that sort for anyone who attacks children. If you attack me, thats one thing. I know what to do when you start attacking me, but when you attack sleeping babies, why, you are lower than a God...

The only thing that I regret in all of this is that two Black groups have to fight and kill each other off. Elijah Muhammad could stop the whole thing tomorrow, just by raising his hand. Really, he could. He could stop the whole thing by raising his hand. But he wont. He doesnt love Black people. He doesnt even want to go forward. Proof of which, theyre killing each other. They killed one in the Bronx. They shot another one in the Bronx. They tried to get six of us Sunday morning. And the pattern has developed across the country. The man has gone insane, absolutely out of his mind. Besides, you cant be seventy-years-old and surround yourself by a handful of sixteen-, seventeen-, eighteen-year- old girls and keep your right mind.

So, from tonight on, therell be a hot time in the old town. With regret. With great regret. Theres no organization in this country that could do more for the struggling Black man than the Black Muslim movement if it wanted to, but it has gotten into the possession of a man whos become senile in his old age and perhaps doesnt realize it. And then he has surrounded himself by his children, who are now in power and want nothing but luxury and security and comfort and will do anything to safeguard their own interests.

So, I feel responsible for having played a major role in developing a criminal organization. It was not a criminal organization at the outset. It was an organization that had the power, the spiritual power, to reform the criminal. And this is what you have to understand. As long as that strong spiritual power was in the movement, it gave the moral strength to the believer that would enable him to rise above all his negative tendencies. I know, because I went into the movement with more negative tendencies than anybody in the movement. It was faith in what I was taught that made it possible for me to stop doing anything that I was doing and everything that I was doing. And I saw thousands of brothers and sisters come in who were in the same condition. And whatever they were doing, they would stop it overnight, just through faith and faith alone. And by this spiritual force, giving one the faith that enabled one to exercise some moral discipline, it became an organization that was to be respected as well as feared.

But as soon as the faith in the movement, the faith in the minds of the people in the movement was destroyed, now it has become a movement thats organized but not on a spiritual basis. And because theres no spiritual ingredient within the organization, theres no moral discipline. For it now consists of brothers and sisters who were once well meaning, but now who do not have the strength to discipline themselves. So they permit themselves to be used as a machine for a man who, as I say, has gone senile and is using them now to commit murder, acts of maiming and crippling other people.

And, I know that theres a brother sitting in here right now, tonight, who was beaten by them a couple of years agoIm not going to say. He knows. And if anybody should apologize to him, I should apologize to him. And I do apologize to him. Because he was beaten by the movement when I was in the movement, and I wasnt too far from him when he got beaten.

But this is what happens and this is what we have to contend with. I, for one, disassociate myself from the movement completely. And I dedicate myself to the organizing of Black people into a group that are interested in doing things constructive, not for just one religious segment of the community, but for the entire Black community. This is what the purpose of the Organization of Afro-American Unity is. 1b have an action program thats for the good of the entire Black community, and we are for it the betterment of the community by any means necessary.

And, since tonight we had to get into this old nasty, negative subject, we didnt want to bring up our program. Were going to have a rally here this coming Sunday at two oclock in the afternoon, at two oclockis it two oclock Brother Ruben? Two oclock. At two oclock, at it which time we will give you the program of the Organization of Afro-American Unity; what our aims are, our objectives are, what our program is, whether or not you want to be identified with it, and what active part you can play in helping us to straighten Harlem out. Nobodys going to straighten out Harlem but us. Nobody cleans up your house for you. You have to clean it up yourself. it Harlem is our house; well clean it up. But when we clean it up, well also control it. Well control the politics. Well control the economy. Well control the school system and see that our people get a break.

So, on that note, Im going to bring my talk to a close. Im going to let you have a five minute recess, during which time were going to take up a collection so that we it can pay for the expense of the hall. And then well take a fifteen-minute question period afterwards.

So, Brother James, is everything all set? Yes. Were going to have athose lights are something elsewere going to have a collection period right now, and all we want you to do brothers and sisters, is to help us pay for the hall. And if each of you put a dollar in those white pails thats going by, well have the hall paid for. And I really want to apologize to you for taking your good time tonight to talk about a nasty, negative subject. But if you wake up in the middle of the night and see your house on fire all around you, with your babies crying, youll take time to get on a nasty, negative subject, too.

* * *

Malcolm X: I want to thank you for your patience. And ask you to be patient just a couplethis microphone doesnt seem to be up at all. Sir, was therethere was some questions you wanted to ask, was it?

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: Yes, the press here wants to ask a couple questions. I just want to take time to answer them for them, then wel1 get right into our business. We can get rid of them and get right into our business.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: Well, Im not at the house, because the house was bombed out.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: I wouldnt say. Behind what has happened, I wouldnt ever say where Im going to live.

Question: What do you mean when you say theres a hot time in the old town tonight?

Malcolm X: Well, thats an expression. Okay....This is the press. They want to get some questions out of the way. Please. When I said thered be a hot time in the old town tonight, thats just a song, you know, that people sing. Yes, sir?

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: Yes, the house was bombed by the Black Muslim movement upon orders from Elijah Muhammad himself. And Raymond Sharrieff, the Supreme Captain of the FOI, stated in a telegram that he made public that the Muslims would not condone me making any statements about Elijah Muhammad. They let it be known where they stood and what they intended to do. And when they made such a statement, I was surprised that the police and the public didnt do something about it. But they were hoping that the Black Muslim movement could get to me and then they would move in on the Black Muslim movement. I know what theyre up to. They want those fools to get me and then theyll move in on them. I can see all the way around that.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: Do I feel that the policewait a minute. Stop. Dont go anywhere. Do I feel that the New York police are providing enough protection, or do I have to have protection of my own? I look for protection from Allah.

Question: You mentioned a conspiracy between the Black Muslims and the right wing in this country. Could you elaborate?

Malcolm X: I mentioned the conspiracy between the Muslims and the right wing in this country? I know for a fact that there is a conspiracy between, among, between the Muslims and the Lincoln Rockwell Nazis and also the Ku Klux Klan. There is a conspiracy. Well, the Ku Klux Klan made a deal, or were trying to make a deal with Elijah Muhammad in 1960 in the home of Jeremiah X, the minister in Atlanta at that time, in the presence of the minister in Philadelphia. They were trying to make a deal with him to make available to Elijah Muhammad a county-size tract of land in Georgia or South Carolina where Elijah Muhammad could then induce Negroes to migrate and make it appear that his program of a segregated state or separated state was feasible. And to what extent these negotiations finally developed, I do not know. Because I was not involved in them beyond the period of December 1960. But I do know that after that, Jeremiah, who was the minister throughout the South, could roam the entire South and the Klan not bother him in any way, shape, or form, nor would they bother any of the Black Muslims from then on. Nor would the Black Muslims bother the Klan.

Question: Are you inferring because of this conspiracy the attempt was made upon your life?

Malcolm X: The attempt could have been made upon my life at the...

Question: Are you inferring that because of this conspiracy the attempt was made upon your life?

Malcolm X: Not necessarily that conspiracy. The attempt was made upon my life because I speak my mind and I know too much and they know that I will speak it.

Question: Are you directing your followers to take any action?

Malcolm X: Am I directing my followers to take action against the Muslims? No. No.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: Am I going to try to infiltrate their organization and win over some of their supporters? No, I have never tried to win supporters from Elijah Muhammad. Since I have left the Black Muslim movement, Ive spoken at these rallies. Those who come, come; those who dont, dont. But Ive never gone out of my way to win over any of his followers. And he himself is fearful, because he knows that you dont have to exercise too much energy to win his followers as soon as they know the truth and compare the twoby the way, this is the brotherthis is Leon Ameer, who was Cassius Clays secretary, whom they beat unmercifully up in Boston. And the courts freed the men who beat him. They fined them $100was it?fined them $100 and he was on the inside of the Black Muslim specialty squad. And it was he who heard Elijah Muhammad, Jr., come to New York when Elijah Muhammad was at the armory in June of last year. Junior stood up and told the Fruitmany of whom are here now alsothat I should have been killed. That my tongue should have been put in an envelope and sent back to Chicago by now. And because Fat Joseph had not done it, they demoted him. He remained captain, but Clarence up in Boston was put over Joseph and Josephs authority was curtailed. And then Clarence, the captain from Boston, and John, the captain from Springfield, came to New York to assassinate me. And came to him to get a silencer and couldnt get it. So the police know this. Its not something thats new. Theyre just waiting until the job is done and then they step in.

Question: Do you know that Elijah Muhammad was behind this?

Malcolm X: Yes.

Question: Or is this your belief?

Malcolm X: Elijah Muhammad invitedcalled all of his officials, national officials, to Chicago in October and ordered them to kill or maim any of his followers who leave him to follow me.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: Well, when you say, how do I know...many of the brothers who were in at that time are out now. And if this ever comes into the courts, there are plenty of witnesses who can stand up and testify to it.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: Id rather not say at this time.

[Question unintelligible, protests from audience]

Malcolm X: Give them two more minutes and well end it.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: Yes, when I said that no one could clean up our homes but us, and that we will clean it up and that no one should control it but us, including the politics; what do I mean? I mean exactly that. That the Black people[Interjection] What? Including who? Powell? Powell is one of us

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: No, hes not a member of our organization, but when I say he is one of us I mean hes one of the family. And then no one outside the family can get up and talk about him. If we talk about him, we talk about him within the family. But nobody outside the family can instigate us against Powell.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: Yes, by controlling it politically I mean that the politics of the community of Harlem should be controlled by those of us who live in Harlem. Not by somebody sitting down in Gracie Mansion.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: No. But the Organization of Afro-American Unity intends to get involved in every kind of action thats going on in New York City. We dont intend to let anybody downtown influence us in any way, shape, or form. We want the influence to come from Harlem. And from other Harlems around the country. Now, this doesnt mean were anti-outside-of-Harlem. This doesnt mean were anti-Bronx or anti-White Plains or anti-white or anti-German or anything like that. But it means were pro-Harlem. Were pro-ourselves. We want to start doing something for ourselves. Thats all it means. It means that we want to stop begging you for your school; we want you to get out of the way and let us straighten out the schools in Harlem.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: I just answered this when I said from tonight on there will be a hot time in the old town. I answered it when this gentleman over here asked. The song will be the same. An implication? An implied threat? I never imply any threat to anyone. I am a Muslim, my religion is Islamits a religion of peace.

Question: Do you think there will be any further attempts?

Malcolm X: Sir, yes I do believe there will be further attempts on my life. I know them. They are foaming at the mouth. The rank-and-file Muslim means well. Its those at the hierarchy, who are living off the fatted calf, who dont mean well. And this coming Sunday at two oclock, as I say, our program will be unfolded. Elijah Muhammad knowshe has done some good things and he has done some bad things. He knows that if he had wanted to, he could have united our people with the Muslim world just by teaching the right religion of Islam. He could have done so. The entire Muslim world would have accepted him; as it is now, the Muslim world has rejected him. He can never go into the Muslim world and say that he is a prophet or that Allah came over here in the fleshthey would cut his head off if he said that. I mean he knows this. None of his followers can go over there without denouncing him. It is impossible for them to go to Mecca or any other place unless they subscribe to Islam, as it is subscribed to over there. So he was in a position to unite us with the Muslim world, those of us who were Muslim. He was also in a position to unite us with Africa. But you cannot read anything that Elijah Muhammad has ever written thats pro-African. I defy you to find one word in his direct writings thats pro-African. You cant find it.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: Listen to this question this man got. What are you trying to get at?

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: No, he asked me. No. I got to tell them what you asked me. He asked me, dont I think if I got hurt, you know, wouldnt some of my followers retaliate? What are you trying to say? Or, what are you trying to get me to say? No. I mean, its okay. Im not going to get you into any trouble. These are your friends in here. I just I want them to hear what youre asking me. Thats all. I just want them to hear what youre asking me. Youre not going to get in no trouble for this. Would he? No. Yes sir, last question.

Question: Youre under civil court order to get out of your house in Queens?

Malcolm X: Im under a civil court order to get out of my house in Queens? You know, I onlysomebody told me that they heard that on the radio. I know nothing about it. And I havent discussed it with a lawyer yet and I wont make any comments until Ive discussed it with a lawyer. But I just hope that nobody tries to go in there while whats left of my belongings are there.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: Some have been in the vicinity, yes, and some policemen, too, have been nice enough to watch the house ever since it was bombed. I wish they had been watching it while it was bombed.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: Yeah, a great deal of my personal belongings were lost. They threw four bombs in there. I might point this out, that those who did it were so vicious and those who did it knew the whole layout of the house. Theyand to show you why I believe in Allahthe bombs that were thrown into the front part of the house were thrown directly against the window, you know, so they came through. But before they threw the first one, l the neighbors saw someone go up to the window with a mop like instrument and break the windows, crack the glass, and then they threw the bombs in after the glass was broken and that was in the front part. Now if they had come around to...they had planned to do it from the front and the back so that I couldnt get out. They covered the front completely, the front door. Then they had come to the back but instead of getting directly in back of the house and throwing it this way, they stood at a forty-five degree angle and tossed it at the window so it glanced and went onto the ground. And the fire hit the window and it woke up my second oldest baby, but the fire burned on the outside of the house. But had that fire, had that gone through that window it would have fallen on a six-year-old girl, a four-year-old girl, and a two-year-old girl. Now Im going to tell you, if it had done it, Id taken my rifle and gone after anybody in sight. I would not wait. I say that because of this. The police know the criminal operation of the Black Muslim movement because they have thoroughly infiltrated it. There is no conversation that takes place in the Black Muslim movement that the city police dont know about, because they have policemen in there. They dont let Black people form anything without some policemen in there. And while I was in the Black Muslim movement, over the Black Muslim movement, many of the police who were sent to infiltrate ustheyre Blackwould tell me, "Look, Im a cop, but I have to come." They would tell me. I knew the Muslim movement was full of police. So dont you think anything is going down that they dont know about. The only thing that goes down is what they want to go down, and what they dont want to go down they dont let it go down.

Question: I have one last question.

Malcolm X: One last question, yes sir.

Question: The Muslims claim that you bombed your own house.

Malcolm X: Yes, thats what I said. The Muslims claim I bombed my house.

Question: Of course, they say, while you were there.

Malcolm X: Yeah. No, well, you can think what you want. The arson squad, the fire marshal, all of them are expert in this kind of thing And if anybody can find where Ive bombed my house, they can put a rifle bullet through my head. It was my children and my own life and my wifes life that was at stake. Hey, let me tell you something, sir. I stood Sunday morning, you know what the degreewhat the temperature was? It was about fifteen or twenty. I stood in my underwear, barefoot in the middle of my driveway with a gun in my hands for forty-five minutes waiting for the police or waiting for the fire department to come. If Id wanted to put on a show I could find a better way than that to put it on. Thats all.

[DISCUSSION PERIOD]

Malcolm X: Theres abrothers and sisters, theres aheres the Saturday Evening Post dated February 27, 1965, and in it theres an article titled, An ex-official tells - why the Black Muslims are a fraud. This is one of the brothers in Boston and who was formerly the secretary up there and who is the cousin of Ronald Stokes, the brother who was killed out in California in April of 1962. And I would like to say this before anything else, and that is, dont think that I dont know how bad I make myself look by attacking an organization that I was once so inseparably a part of. Well, Im not particularly concerned it with how bad it makes me look. My prime concern is to expose it to the fullest of my ability, let the chips fall where they may. And if the Black Muslim movement says that Im wrong in what I say, then I say since theyre so well qualified and equipped, let them attack the Klan. Let them go find out wholet them get the persons who bombed that it church in Birmingham. Because Ill go get them. Ill go attack the Klan. And attack Rockwell and any of the others. And I defy them to do so. They cant do it. Because they both have the same paymaster. So now our question period.. And you have to stand up because I cant see beyond this mans light. Yes sir.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: Dont I think that we should become involved in some direct action, demonstrations? We are going to unveil our program on that next Sunday at two oclock. Brother, Im for anything youre for as long as its going to get some results. Im for anything youre for. As long as its intelligent, as long as its disciplined, as long as its aimed in the right directionIm for it. And what determines what we should do, or shouldnt do, will in no way be influenced by what the man downtown thinks.

We dont need anybody on the outside laying the ground rules by which we are going to fight our battles. We'll study the battle, study the enemy, study what were up against, and then outline or map our own battle strategy. And well get some results. But as long as you have someone coming in from the outside telling you how you should do it and how you shouldnt do itand always what they tell you is nonviolence, peaceful, love everybody, forgive them Lord, they know not what they do. As long as you get into that kind of bag, why youll never get anywhere. What we want is to let them know that our aims are just. Our aims are within the realm of justice. And since they are, were justified in going after those aims. Dont you know its a disgrace for the United States of America to letto have Martin Luther King, my good friend, the Right Reverend Dr. Martin, in Alabama, using school children to do what the federal government should do. Think of this. Those school children shouldnt have to march. Why Lyndon Johnson is supposed to have troops down there marching.

Your children arent supposed to have to get out there and demonstrate just to vote. Is it that bad? It shows our so-called leaders have been outmaneuvered. Every day, you look on the television, you listen to the radio, you read the newspaper, and see where Black it people are going to jail by the hundreds, by the thousands. You dont do this in a civilized country. In any other country, the government would do its job. But this exists only because the government is not doing its job.

Theyve got Martin Luther King down there with crocodile tears crying his way into jail and still coming out and havent got the ballot yet. We can get the ballot. Didnt they pass the civil rights bill? Just a minute, didnt they pass the civil rights bill and have made it legal. Dont you know that anywhere our people want to register and vote theyre within their legal rights? All you and I have to do is show that were men. And when we, and when they go to vote, we go with them. With them. With them. Prepared! Not prepared to make trouble. Not prepared to cause trouble. But prepared to protect ourselves in case trouble comes our way. And no one can find fault with that. Yes maam?

Question: My nephew is in Vietnam and

Malcolm X: Your nephew is where?

Question: In South Vietnam

Malcolm X: In Vietnam? You should have him in Alabama.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: You told him right. Sister, youre talking my kind of talk. Yeah.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: I know you would. I know you would. Who else? Yes maam? . . .

Question: Brother Malcolm [Unintelligible] have fallen out of a hospital window. We buried him Saturday. [Unintelligible] refuse to speak to anyone. They have not spoken to his mother or anyone else. We have sent delegations there and each time they tell us that theres no one available to speak to. I had a picket line there Saturday. Now cant something be done about this? A thirteen-year-old child?

Malcolm X: Fell out of the hospital window?

Question: So they say. But this child had lived on the top floor all of his life. What can we do and what must we do to avoid something else like this?

Malcolm X: This is what I meant earlier when I said concerning the importance of our controlling Harlem. As long as we have outsiders running our hospitals and our schools and our everything else, they will run us right on out of existence. I would suggest that you come over to the office and see what we can get our heads together on. And see what we can do. Anything I can do, I certainly will and I know all the brothers and sisters will. We have time for two more questions. Yes maam. Right in front.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: No, theyre not. Theyre marching for their parents. Let me tell you. You know, I was in Selma, and when I got to Selma I talked to these children. I talked to them. And you know I have to say this. I have to expose the man. Kings man did not want me to talk to them. They told me they didnt mind me coming in and all of that but they preferred that I didnt talk to the children. Because they knew what I was going to say. But the children insisted that I be heard. Otherwise, I wouldnt have gotten a hearing at all. And some of the, many of the students from SNCC also insisted that I be heard. This is the only way I got a chance to talk to them. And I might point out that one little girl who was only thirteen years old told me that she had been in jail the night before. She had just gotten out that morning. And she told of how they were using cattle prods, sticking it up against the heads of some of these little children and giving them headaches and things of that sort. Oh, yes. The most brutal form of punishment imaginable takes place down there and nothing is done about it. Old Lyndon is all tied up in South Vietnam and the Congo and other places, but hes not minding his business in Mississippi, in Alabama. But you see, I dont blame them. I blame us. Really, I blame us. Once we organize, we can straighten it out.

The government is not going to straighten it out. Its getting too corrupt. It has too many racists in it. Too many segregationists running the government. So how is somebody from Texas going to stop the Klan? From Texas! Texas is a Klan state itself No. You and I have to do it. And I promised the brothers and sisters in Alabama when I was there that wed be back. Ill be back, youll be back, well be back. Well ease on in, brothers and sisters. Those people down there arent afraid. They arent afraid, theyre just waiting for somebody to tell them what to do. Thats all. And they dont go for that old turn-the-other-cheek stuff. No. Thats why they got children doing it. And even those children dont go for turning the other cheek. And theres nothing wrong with my saying this. Any time you live in a government, a government in 1965, that will permit conditions to exist that force a Negro leader to take childrenbabiesand march them down the street to get the right to register and vote, why that government should come under question. Should come under examination. We should stop and take a second look at it. And if its not the government, then its the men in the government. But the blame has got to be put somewhere. But you know where I put it? On us. Were too easy. Were too forgiving. Were too loving. Were too forgetful. Were too compromising. And were too peaceful. Time for one more question. Yes sir.... Yes, yes maam.

[Question unintelligible]

Malcolm X: Yes, Yes. Akbar Muhammad along with Wallace Muhammad. But Akbar Muhammad gave a press conference in Cairo completely disassociating himself from his father and pointing out that what Elijah Muhammad is teaching in this country is absolutely and diametrically opposed to the true teachings of Islam. This was in Cairo. And actually what Elijah Muhammad is teaching is an insult to the entire Muslim world, because Islam as the religion, as a religion, has nothing to do with color. There is no religion that has anything to do with color and Islamas a religion, it doesnt use the color of a mans skin to measure him or as a yardstick. Islam, as a religion, judges a man by his intention, by his behavior, by his deeds. Now I can judge these crackers not cause theyre white. Im not talking about them cause theyre white. Im talking about them because what they do. Do you understand? Anything you hear me say here about whitey, or the white man, is not because hes whiteno, Ill shake his hand if hes all right. But first he got to get all right.

The standard of judgment from a Muslim is behavior, intention, and deed. Do you understand? What Elijah Muhammad teaches is not that. Yes sir.

Question: Getting back to the action.

Malcolm X: The action, yes.

Question: You know, having power, wouldnt it be better if we wereI mean speaking of the Black manto form a Black Ku Klux Klan7

Malcolm X: No. No. No. Dont let them maneuver you into forming anything that can be compared with the Klan. See, it is true were the target of brutal, criminal treatment from the Klan. Now, we dont need a Black Ku Klux Klan. All we need is Black people who believe in the brotherhood of man and who will fight anyone who threatens the brotherhood of man. Now, the Klan is a threat to this brotherhood and we are legally within our rights to defend ourselves from this Klan. But if we call ourselves the Klan, what will happen the press will pick up what you do and make what you do look wrong. Because they will make it look wrong anyway. So if you call yourself that, you help them. You help them hurt you. No we dont want anything to do with the Klan or anything like the Klan. We want to destroy the Klan. Disband it, destroy it, erase it from this earth. And we can do it.
 
Youve been in the army. They taught you all those tricks.  Well, use them. I got to say this; then were going to close. You need to study guerrilla warfare. Get every book you can find on guerrilla warfare. Theres nothing wrong with saying that. Yes, its good to know everything. Theres nothing wrong with knowing that. Why, the government teaches you that. They draft you to teach you that, dont they? Sure, they it taught it to your son. Well, go on and teach it to your son. But then tell your son how to use it. No, you study. Were going to have classes. The OAAU is going to have classes in all of the various sciences that you and I need to knowkarate, judo. Weve got some experts. This brother here is an expert judo man, expert karate man. Hed break that board right here like it wasnt even a board.

You come on in the OAAU and well train you. Show you how to protect yourself. Not so that you can go out and attack someone. You should never attack anybody. But at the same time whenever you, yourself, are attacked you are not supposed to turn the other cheek. Never turn the other cheek until you see the white man turn his cheek. The day that the white man turns the cheek, then you turn the cheek. If Martin Luther King was teaching white people to turn the other cheek, then I would say he was justified in teaching Black people to turn the other cheek. Thats all Im against. Make it a two-way street. Make it even-steven. If Im going to be nonviolent, then let them be nonviolent. But as long as theyre not nonviolent, dont you let anybody tell you anything about nonviolence. No. Be intelligent. Brothers and sisters, were going to have our program on Sunday at two oclock. I hope that every one of you will be here. It will be one of the last programs that we haveplease dont move; please dont move; please dont move. Its going to be one of the last programs we have, next Sunday, at two oclock. It will be designed to unfold to you completely, what our program is, and as I said earliersome of you came latethe only reason that I didnt do it tonight, I wanted to give you a complete clarification on what happened at my house Sunday morning, so that you would know.

And once you know, then you can stay way away from me or come on in, well get you, one of the two. But I dont want to get you into anything that you dont know what youre getting into. Im not trying to get you in any trouble, but I am trying to get something organized that will enable us to take a direct action against the forces that have been holding us back. Thank you.






I first want to thank the Harvard Law School Forum for the invitation to speak here this evening, more especially to speak on a very timely topicThe African Revolution and Its Impact on the American Negro. I probably wont use the word American Negro, but substitute Afro-American. And when I say Afro-American, I mean it in the same context in which you usually use the word Negro. Our people today are increasingly shying away from use of that word. They find that when youre identified as Negro, it tends to make you catch a whole lot of hell that people who dont use it dont catch.

In the present debate over the Congo, you are probably aware that a new tone and a new tempo, almost a new temper, are being reflected among African statesmen toward the United States. And I think we should be interested in and concerned with what impact this will have upon Afro-Americans and how it will affect Americas international race relations. We know that it will have an effect at the international level. Its already having such an effect. But I am primarily concerned with what effect it will have on the internal race relations of this countrythat is to say, between the Afro-American and the white American.

When you let yourself be influenced by images created by others, youll find that oftentimes the one who creates those images can use them to mislead you and misuse you. A good example: A couple of weeks ago I was on a plane with a couple of Americans, a male and a female sitting to my right. We were in the same row and had a nice conversation for about thirty-five to forty minutes. Finally the lady looked at my briefcase and said, I would like to ask you a personal question, and I knew what was coming. She said, What kind of last name could you have that begins with X? I said, Malcolm. Ten minutes went by, and she turned to me and said, Youre not Malcolm X? You see, we had a nice conversation going, just three human beings, but she was soon looking at the image created by the press. She said so: I just wouldnt believe that you were that man, she said. I had a similar experience last week at Oxford. The Oxford Union had arranged a debate. Before the debate I had dinner with four students. A girl student looked kind of crosseyed, goggle-eyed and otherwise, and finally just told me she wanted to ask me a question. (I found out she was a conservative, by the way, whatever that is.) She said, I just cant get over your not being as I had expected. I told her it was a case of the press carefully creating images.

Again I had a similar experience last night. At the United Nations a friend from Africa came in with a white woman who is involved with a philanthropic foundation over there. He and I were engaged in conversation for several minutes, and she was in and out of the conversation. Finally I heard her whisper to someone off to the side. She didnt think I was listening. She said-she actually said thisHe doesnt look so wild, you know. Now this is a full-grown, so-called mature woman. It shows the extent to which the press can create images. People looking for one thing actually miss the boat because theyre looking for the wrong thing. They are looking for someone with horns, someone who is a rabble-rouser, an irrational, antisocial extremist. They expect to hear me say that Negroes should kill all the white peopleas if you could kill all the white people! In fact, if I had believed what they said about the people in Britain, I never would have gone to Oxford. I would have let it slide. When I got there I didnt go by what I had read about them. I found out they were quite human and likable. Some werent what I had expected.

Now I have taken time to discuss images because one of the sciences used and misused today is this science of image making. The power structure uses it at the local level, at the national level, at the international level. And oftentimes when you and I feel weve come to a conclusion on our own, the conclusion is something that someone has invented for us through the images he has created.

Im a Muslim. Now if something is wrong with being Muslim, we can argue, we can get with it. Im a Muslim, which means that I believe in the religion of Islam. I believe in Allah, the same God that many of you would probably believe in if you knew more about Him. I believe in all of the prophets: Abraham, Moses, Jesus, Muhammad. Most of you are Jewish, and you believe in Moses; you might not pick Jesus. If youre Christians, you believe in Moses and Jesus. Well, Im Muslim, and I believe in Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad. I believe in all of them. So I think Im way up on you.

In Islam we practice prayer, charity, fasting. These should be practiced in all religions. The Muslim religion also requires one to make the pilgrimage to the Holy City of Mecca. I was fortunate enough to make it in April, and I went back again in September. Insofar as being a Muslim is concerned, I have done what one is supposed to do to be a Muslim. Despite being a Muslim, I cant overlook the fact that Im an Afro-American in a country which practices racism against black people. There is no religion under the sun that would make me forget the suffering that Negro people have undergone in this country. Negroes have suffered for no reason other than that their skins happen to be black. So whether Im Muslim, Christian, Buddhist, Hindu, atheist or agnostic, I would still be in the front lines with Negro people fighting against the racism, segregation, and discrimination practiced in this country at all levels in the North, South, East, and West. I believe in the brotherhood of all men, but I dont believe in wasting brotherhood on anyone who doesnt want to, practice it with me. Brotherhood is a two-way street. I dont think brotherhood should be practiced with a man just because his skin is white. Brotherhood should hinge upon the deeds and attitudes of a man. I couldnt practice brotherhood, for example, with some of those Eastlands or crackers in the South who are responsible for the condition of our people.

I dont think anyone would deny either that if you send chickens out of your barnyard in the morning, at nightfall those chickens will come home to roost in your barnyard. Chickens that you send out always come back home. It is a law of nature. I was an old farm boy myself, and I got in trouble saying this once, but it didnt stop me from being a farm boy. Other peoples chickens dont come to roost on your doorstep, and yours dont go to roost on theirs. The chickens that this country is responsible for sending out, whether the country likes it or not (and if youre mature, you look at it like it is), someday, and someday soon, have got to come back home to roost.

Victims of racism are created in the image of racists. When the victims struggle vigorously to protect themselves from violence of others, they are made to appear in the image of criminals; as the criminal image is projected onto the victim. The recent situation in the Congo is one of the best examples of this. The headlines were used to mislead the public, to create wrong images. In the Congo, planes were bombing Congolese villages, yet Americans read that American-trained anti-Castro Cuban pilots were bombing rebel strongholds. These pilots were actually dropping bombs on villages with women and children. But because the tags American-trained and anti-Castro Cubans were applied, the bombing was legal. Anyone against Castro is all right. The press gave them a holier than thou image. And you let them get away with it because of the labels. The victim is made the criminal. It is really mass murder, murder of women, children, and babies. And mass murder is disguised as a humanitarian project. They fool nobody but the people of America. They dont fool the people of the world, who see beyond the images.

Their man in the Congo is Tshombe, the murderer of the rightful Prime Minister of the Congo. No matter what kind of language you use, hes purely and simply a murderer. The real Prime Minister of the Congo was Patrice Lumumba. The American government-your and my government-took this murderer and hired him to run the Congo. He became their hired killer. And to show what a hired killer he is, his first act was to go to South Africa and to hire more killers, paying them with American dollars. But he is glorified because he is given the image of the only one who could bring stability to the Congo. Whether he can bring stability or not, hes still a murderer. The headlines spoke of white hostages, not simply hostages, but white hostages, and of white nuns and priests, not simply nuns and priests, but white nuns and priests. Why? To gain the sympathy of the white public of America. The press had to shake up your mind in order to get your sympathy and support for criminal actions. They tricked you. Americans consider forty white lives more valuable than four thousand black lives. Thousands of Congolese were losing their lives. Mercenaries were paid with American dollars. The American press made the murderers look like saints and the victims like criminals. They made criminals look like victims and indeed the devil look like an angel and angels like the devil.
 A friend of mine from Africa, who is in a good position to know, said he believed the United States government is being advised by her worst enemy in the Congo, because an American citizen could not suggest such insane actionespecially identifying with Tshombe, who is the worst African on earth.

You cannot find an African on earth who is more hated than Tshombe. Its a justifiable hatred they have toward him. He has won no victory himself. His Congolese troops have never won a victory for him. Every victory has been won by white mercenaries, who are hired to kill for him. The African soldiers in the Congo are fighting for the Stanleyville government. Here Tshombe is a curse. Hes an insult to anyone who means to do right, black or white. When Tshombe visited Cairo, he caused trouble. When he visited Rome last week, he caused trouble, and the same happened in Germany. Wherever Tshombe goes, trouble erupts. And if Tshombe comes to America, youll see the worst rioting, bloodshed, and violence this country has ever seen. Nobody wants this kind of man in his country.

What effect does all this have on Afro-Americans? What effect will it have on race relations in this country? In the U.N. at this moment, Africans are using more uncompromising language and are heaping hot fire upon America as the racist and neocolonial power par excellence. African statesmen have never used this language before. These statesmen are beginning to connect the criminal, racist acts practiced in the Congo with similar acts in Mississippi and Alabama. The Africans are pointing out that the white American governmentnot all white peoplehas shown just as much disregard for lives wrapped in black skin in the Congo as it shows for lives wrapped in black skin in Mississippi and in Alabama. When Africans, therefore, as well as we begin to think of Negro problems as interrelated, what will be the effect of such thinking on programs for improved race relations in this country? Many people will tell you that the black man in this country doesnt identify with Africa. Before 1959, many Negroes didnt. But before 1959, the image of Africa was created by an enemy of Africa, because Africans werent in a position to create and project their own images. The image was created by the imperial powers of Europe.

Europeans created and popularized the image of Africa as a jungle, a wild place where people were cannibals, naked and savage in a countryside overrun with dangerous animals. Such an image of the Africans was so hateful to Afro-Americans that they refused to identify with Africa. We did not realize that in hating Africa and the Africans we were hating ourselves. You cannot hate the roots of a tree and not hate the tree itself. Negroes certainly cannot at the same time hate Africa and love themselves. We Negroes hated the American features: the African nose, the shape of our lips, the color of our skin, the texture of our hair. We could only end up hating ourselves. Our skin became a trap, a prison; we felt inferior, inadequate, helpless. It was not an image created by Africans or by Afro-Americans, but by an enemy.

Since 1959 the image has changed. The African states have emerged and achieved independence. Black people in this country are crying out for their independence and show a desire to make a fighting stand for it. The attitude of the Afro-American cannot be disconnected from the attitude of the African. The pulse beat, the voice, the very life-drive that is reflected in the African is reflected today here among the Afro-Americans. The only way you can really understand the black man in America and the changes in his heart and mind is to fully understand the heart and mind of the black man on the African continent; because it is the same heart and the same mind, although separated by four hundred years and by the Atlantic Ocean. There are those who wouldnt like us to have the same heart and the same mind for fear that that heart and mind might get together. Because when our people in this country received a new image of Africa, they automatically united through the new image of themselves. Fear left them completely. There was fear, however, among the racist elements and the State Department. Their fear was of our sympathy for Africa and for its hopes and aspirations and of this sympathy developing into a form of alliance. It is only natural to expect us today to turn and look in the direction of our homeland and of our motherland and to wonder whether we can make any contact with her.

I grew up in Lansing, Michigan, a typical American city. In those days, a black man could have a job shining shoes or waiting tables. The best job was waiting tables at the country club, as is still the case in most cities. In those days, if a fellow worked at the State House shining shoes, he was considered a big shot in the town. Only when Hitler went on the rampage in 1939, and this country suffered a manpower shortage, did the black man get a shot at better jobs. He was permitted a step forward only when Uncle Sam had his back to the wall and needed him. In 1939, 40, and 41, a black man couldnt even join the Army or Navy, and when they began drafting, they werent drafting black soldiers but only white. I think it was well agreed upon and understood: if you let the black man get in the Army, get hold of a gun, and learn to shoot it, you wouldnt have to tell him what the target was. It was not until the Negro leaders (and in this sense I use the word Negro purposely) began to cry out and complainIf white boys are gonna die on the battlefields, our black boys must die on the battlefields toolthat they started drafting us. If it hadnt been for that type of leadership, we never would have been drafted. The Negro leaders just wanted to show that we were good enough to die too, although we hadnt been good enough to join the Army or Navy prior to that time.

During the time that Hitler and Tojo were on the rampage, the black man was needed in the plants, and for the first time in the history of America, we were given an opportunity on a large scale to get skills in areas that were closed previously to us. When we got these skills, we were put in a position to get more money. We made more money. We moved to a better neighborhood. When we moved to a better neighborhood, we were able to go to a better school and to get a better education, and this put us into a position to know what we hadnt been receiving up to that time. Then we began to cry a little louder than we had ever cried before. But this advancement never was out of Uncle Sams goodwill. We never made one step forward until world pressure put Uncle Sam on the spot. And it was when he was on the spot that he allowed us to take a couple of steps forward. It has never been out of any internal sense of morality or legality or humanism that we were allowed to advance. You have been as cold as an icicle whenever it came to the rights of the black man in this country. Excuse me for raising my voice, but I think its time. As long as my voice is the only thing I raise, I dont think you should become upset!

Because we began to cry a little louder, a new strategy was used to handle us. The strategy evolved with the Supreme Court desegregation decision, which was written in such tricky language that every crook in the country could sidestep it. The Supreme Court desegregation decision was handed down over ten years ago. It has been implemented less than ten percent in those ten years. It was a token advancement, even as weve been the recipients of tokenism in education, housing, employment, everything. But nowhere in the country during the past ten years has the black man been treated as a human being in the same context as other human beings. Hes always being patronized in a very paternalistic way, but never has he been given an opportunity to function as a human being. Actually, in one sense, its our own fault, but Ill get to that later on. We have never gotten the real thing.

Heck, Ill get to it right now. The reason we never received the real thing is that we have not displayed any tendency to do the same for ourselves which other human beings do: to protect our humanity and project our humanity. Ill clarify what I mean. Not a single white person in America would sit idly by and let someone do to him what we black men have been letting others do to us. The white person would not remain passive, peaceful, and nonviolent. The day the black man in this country shows others that we are just as human as they in reaction to injustice, that we are willing to die just as quickly to protect our lives and property as whites have shown, only then will our people be recognized as human beings. It is inhuman, absolutely subhuman, for a man to let a dog bite him and not fight back. Let someone club him and let him not fight back, or let someone put water hoses on his women, his mother and daughter and babies and let him not fight back then hes subhuman. The day he becomes a human being he will react as other human beings have reacted, and nobody will hold it against him.

In 1959, we saw the emergence of the Negro revolt and the collapse of European colonialism on the African continent. Our struggle, our initiative, and our militancy were in tune with the struggle and initiative and militancy of our brothers in Africa. When the colonial powers saw they couldnt remain in Africa, they behaved as somebody playing basketball. He gets the basketball and must pass it to a teammate in the clear. The colonial powers were boxed in on the African continent. They didnt intend to give up the ball. They just passed it to the one that was in the clear, and the one that was in the clear was the United States. The ball was passed to her, and she picked it up and has been running like mad ever since. Her presence on the African continent has replaced the imperialism and the colonialism of Europeans. But its still imperialism and colonialism. Americans fooled many of the Africans into thinking that they werent an imperialist power or colonial power until their intentions  were revealed, until they hired Tshombe and put him back to kill in the Congo. Nothing America could have done would have ever awakened the Africans to her true intentions as did her dealings with this murderer named Tshombe.

America knew that Africa was waking up in 59. Africa was developing a higher degree of intelligence than she reflected in the past. America, for her part, knew she had to use a more intelligent approach. She used the friendly approach: the Peace Corps, Crossroads. Such philanthropic acts disguised American imperialism and colonialism with dollar-ism. America was not honest with what she was doing. I dont mean that those in the Peace Corps werent honest. But the Corps was being used more for political purposes than for moral purposes. I met many white Peace Corps workers while on the African continent. Many of them were properly motivated and were making a great contribution. But the Peace Corps will never work over there until the idea has been applied over here.

Of course the Civil Rights Bill was designed supposedly to solve our problem. As soon as it was passed, however, three civil rights workers were murdered. Nothing has been done about it, and I think nothing will be done about it until the people themselves do something about it. I, for one, think the best way to stop the Ku Klux Klan is to talk to the Ku Klux Klan in the only language it understands, for you cant talk French to someone who speaks German and communicate. Find out what language a person speaks, speak their language, and youll get your point across. Racists know only one language, and it is doing the black man in this country an injustice to expect him to talk the language of peace to people who dont know peaceful language. In order to get any kind of point across our people must speak whatever language the racist speaks.

The government cant protect us. The government has not protected us. It is time for us to do whatever is necessary by any means necessary to protect ourselves. If the government doesnt want us running around here wild like that, then I say let the government get up off its whatever its on, and take care of it itself. After the passage of the Civil Rights Bill, they killed the Negro educator Pitt in Georgia. The killers were brought to court and then set free. This is the pattern in this country, and I think that white people (I use the word white people because its cut short; it gets right to the point) are doing us an injustice. If you expect us to be nonviolent, you yourselves arent. If someone came knocking on your door with a rifle, youd walk out of the door with your rifle. Now the black man in this country is getting ready to do the same thing.

I say in conclusion that the Negro problem has ceased to be a Negro problem. It has ceased to be an American problem and has now become a world problem, a problem for all humanity. Negroes waste their time confining their struggle to civil rights: In that context the problem remains only within the jurisdiction of the United States. No allies can help Negroes without violating United States protocol.

But today the black man in America has seen his mistake and is correcting it by lifting his struggle from the level of civil rights to the level of human rights. No longer does the United States government sit in an ivory tower where it can point at South Africa, point at the Portuguese, British, French, and other European colonial powers. No longer can the United States hold twenty million black people in second-class citizenship and think that the world will keep a silent mouth. No matter what the independent African states are doing in the United Nations, it is only a flicker, a glimpse, a ripple of what this country is in for in the future, unless a halt is brought to the illegal injustices which our people continue to suffer every day.

The Organization of Afro-American Unity, to which I belong, is a peaceful organization based on brotherhood. Oh yes, it is peaceful. But I believe you cant have peace until youre ready to protect it. As you will die protecting yours, I will die protecting mine. The OAAU is trying to get our problem before the United Nations. This is one of its immediate projects on the domestic front. We will work with all existing civil rights organizations. Since there has been talk of minimizing demonstrations and of becoming involved in political action, we want to see if civil rights organizations mean it.

The OAAU will become involved in every move to secure maximum opportunity for black people to register peacefully as voters. We believe that along with voter registration, Afro-Americans need voter education. Our people should receive education in the science of politics so that the crooked politician cannot exploit us. We must put ourselves in a position to become active politically. We believe that the OAAU should provide defense units in every area of this country where workers are registering or are seeking voting rights, in every area where young students go out on the battlefront, which it actually is. Such self-defense units should have brothers who will not go out and initiate aggression, but brothers who are qualified, equipped to retaliate when anyone imposes brutally on us, whether it be in Mississippi, Massachusetts, California, or New York City. The OAAU doesnt believe it should permit civil rights workers to be murdered.

When a government cant protect civil rights workers, we believe we should do it. Even in the Christian Bible it says that he who kills with the sword shall be killed by the sword, and Im not against it. Im for peace, yet I believe that any man facing death should be able to go to any length to assure that whoever is trying to kill him doesnt have a chance. The OAAU supports the plan of every civil rights group for political action, as long as it doesnt involve compromise. We dont believe Afro-Americans should be victims any longer. We believe we should let the world know, the Ku Klux Klan know, that bloodshed is a twoway street, that dying is a two-way street, that killing is a two-way street. Now I say all this in as peaceful a language as I know.

There was another man back in history whom I read about once, an old friend of mine whose name was Hamlet, who confronted, in a sense, the same thing our people are confronting here in America. Hamlet was debating whether To be or not to bethat was the question. He was trying to decide whether it was nobler in the mind to suffer, peacefully, the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune or whether it was nobler to take up arms and oppose them. I think his little soliloquy answers itself. As long as you sit around suffering the slings and arrows and are afraid to use some slings and arrows yourself, youll continue to suffer. The OAAU has come to the conclusion that it is time to take up whatever means necessary to bring these sufferings to a halt.

* * *

Alan Dershowitz: The floor will be open for questions.

Question: Mr. X, do you feel that the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to Dr. Martin Luther King has in any way helped the Negro cause in the United States?

Malcolm X: Black people in this country have no peace and have not made the strides forward that would in any way justify receiving a reward by any of us. The war is not won nor has any battle been won. But I have no comment to make about my good friend, Dr. King.

Question: Sir, I would like to know the difference between a white racist and a black racist, besides the fact that they are white and black.

Malcolm X: Usually the black racist has been produced by the white racist. And in most cases, black racism is in reaction to white racism. If you analyze it very closely, you will find that it is not black racism. Black people have shown fewer tendencies toward racism than any people since the beginning of history. I cannot agree with my brother here who says that Negroes are immoral; thats what I get out of what he said. It is the whites who have committed violence against us.

Question: I am one of the whites who agrees with you one hundred percent. You pointed out that the majority of Negro people voted for Johnson, and then he invaded the Congo, something which Goldwater did not even advocate. What do you propose that black people should do in future elections?

Malcolm X: First our people should become registered voters. But they should not become actively involved in politics until we have also gotten a much better understanding of the game of politics in this country. We go into politics in a sort of gullible way, where politics in this country is cold-blooded and heartless. We need a better understanding of the science of politics as well as becoming registered voters. And then we should not take sides either way. We should reserve political action for the situation at hand, in no way identifying with either political party (the Democrats or the Republicans) or selling ourselves to either party. We should take political action for the good of human beings; that will eliminate the injustices. I for one do not think that the man presently in the White House is morally capable of taking the kind of action necessary to eliminate these things.

Question: Mr. X, your idea of an Afro-American is a very hard lump to swallow. James Baldwin, in describing a conference of African writers and politicians which took place in Paris in 1956, reported that the conference had difficulty in defining an African personality common to all countries in Africa and to the American Negroes. The members of the conference, including James Baldwin, began to realize that there was a big rift between American Negroes and the people from Africa. The American Negro has a totally different set of values and ideas from that of the African. Therefore, if you still talk about the Afro-American in which the only connection is the color of the skin, this is a racist concept. Why emphasize Afro-American, which is a racist concept and a reactionary concept, instead of something more positive?

Malcolm X: I do not think that anything is more positive than accepting what you are. The Negro in America tries to be more American than anyone else. The attempt has created a person who is actually negative in almost everything he reflects. We are just as much African today as we were in Africa four hundred years ago, only we are a modern counterpart of it. When you hear a black man playing music, whether it is jazz or Bach, you still hear African music. The soul of Africa is still reflected in the music played by black men. In everything else we do we still are African in color, feeling, everything. And we will always be that whether we like it or not.

Asalaam Alaikum, all my brothers and sisters. Well, I hardly know how to get started, but I can let you know in advance that were not going to keep you here tonight very long. I first have to make a confessionI almost didnt get here tonight; something came up, a situation developed where we were going to almost have to postpone our little brief talk until next Sunday. But thanks to the one that created the universesome call him God; some call him a whole lot of things; I call him AllahIm thankful to be able to be here.
Now, brothers and sisters, all I would like to do tonight, and I beg your forgiveness, is to give you a brief sketch or outline on some experiences that Ive had during the past eighteen weeks. Its certainly good to be back, although I dont know how a black man can leave a black continent and come back to a white continent and say its good to be back I would like to give a brief sketch to you concerning some of the experiences that Ive had, some of the things Ive seen, some of the things Ive heard, so that you can evaluate them with your own mind.

The reason that it has to be brief is that I have to leave the country again this week Ill be back next Sunday, but Im involved in a debate at Oxford University in England, outside of London, on Thursday. I have to go there for that, and then come back here for a rally which were going to have next Sunday night, at which time we are going to try and get some experts to come and give us an outline of exactly what has taken place in the Congo, so that the black people in Harlem wont have to be involved in a situation where well be sitting on the log, wondering whats going on. I think that you and I should realize that the time has come for us to let the world know that were not only interested in some kind of integrated situation in the United States, but were interested in taking our place on the world stage, and were interested in anything that involves black people anywhere on this earth.

It would be a crime for you and me to be in a city that has more black people in it than any other city on this earth, New York City, and be silent in the face of the criminal action of the United States government in conjunction with Belgium in the Congo. I mean criminal, criminal action that this government has involved itself in. Lyndon B. Johnsonhe said it today, hes to blame. He doesnt have to say it; we know hes to blame before he said it. He waited until the people had voted for him and he got in, and things got cut and dried. Then he got in cahoots with Belgiumone of the worst racist governments that has ever existed on the face of the earth, Belgium. This government, in conjunction with that government, is dropping paratroopers in the Congo under the pretext that its some kind of humanitarian operation.

So next Sunday night we are going to try and get some of our African brothers and some of our Afro- American brothers who are well versed in the facts concerning the history of the Congo to tell how the white man happened to be over there in the first place, why he is over there still and finds it so difficult to leave, and most important of all, what are the factors behind the deep-rooted hostility that seems to lie in the hearts of our Congolese brothers toward them. We want to know if our brothers are savage, as they keep implying, or are they justified in the feelings that theyve been displaying toward these people who are over there in their land, not by their invitation?

I dont want to get on that, but this is what we want next Sunday night, and were going to try and get some help in outlining the incidents that led up to the present situation in the Congo today. But never believe what you read in the newspaperstheyre not going to tell you the truth. The truth isnt in them. Not when it comes to the Congo; they cant tell the truth. I was on the radio with a man the other night, and he had the nerve to tell on the air about some Congolese atrocities, and the benevolence of the Belgian government, and how Belgian atrocities never took place. I didnt believe that a white man, so intelligent, would have so much nerve in 1964. I could see him taking that stand in 1924, or even 1944, or maybe 1954, but not 1964.

So, brothers and sisters, when I left here on the 9th of July, it was primarily because I had just been successful in starting a new religious organization which many of you have heard about, the Muslim Mosque, Incorporated, and we had also just been successful in organizing a new nonreligious organization, the Organization of Afro-American Unity. One of the main reasons for undertaking the journey was to lay a foundation. It is impossible for any black group in America to become involved in any kind of religion that doesnt have roots directly connected with some source in the East. And it is impossible for any black group in America to become involved in any kind of political organization that doesnt have some roots directly connected with our roots on the African continent. This is the era of revolution.

Now I must just take time to clarify what I mean before some of these pencil-scratchers misquote me, which theyre going to do anyway. You notice two years ago the American press was calling your and my struggle a revolutionNegro revolution, Negro revolution. Now, they didnt mind calling it that, and they didnt mind you referring to it as that, because they knew that what was happening was no revolution. But when you start using the word "evolution" in its real sense, then they get shaky. They start classifying you as a fanatic, or something subversive or seditious, or other than a law-abiding person. But today were living in an era of revolution, which means an era of change, when people who are being oppressed want a change. And they dont want a gradual change. They dont want the change that comes year by year, or week by week, or month by month. They want a change right now.

Cairo is one of the cities on this earth that has the headquarters for more revolutionary movements, I imagine, than any other city. By the way, when I got there, as you know, they were having the African summit conference. All of our brothers were over there, getting together, discussing the problems of the world. It was a beautiful sight, especially when you live in a country where you and I dont have any chance to discuss anything but an integrated cup of coffee, or how to integrate some toilet in Mississippi. When you go and find independent African nations, headed by their leaders, their heads of state, sitting down and discussing problems of the world, the economic, political, and social problems of the world, why, it makes you feel good, it makes you get a new lease on life.

When I got there, there was a great deal of pressure already being put on various segments of the African community to not open any doors, and these pressures were being put down by this government. I started not to say this government, but Im going to tell the truth the way it is, let the chips fall where they may.

They had their men over there running around like mad with their money, trying to make it impossible for any American Negro to be included in any way in any conference dealing with Africans, or dealing with international affairs. They try to give the impression over there that you and I arent interested in international affairs, that you and I are interested only in integrating Mississippi. This is the image that is very skillfully spread abroad of the American Negro, that you and I cannot see beyond the shores of Americathat our minds and our thoughts and our desires and our hopes are limited to everything right here.

Naturally, any African who would believe this is shocked when he sees an Afro-American coming to an international conference, especially a conference thats composed just of independent African states. Some of them this government has tried to give the impression over there that you and I dont even identify with Africa. And some of them get shocked when they see you and me turning in their direction.

Im telling you, theyve done a vicious job. This thing they call the USIS, the United States Information Service, is one of the most vicious organs that has ever been put together and sent anywhere by any country. It will make that propaganda machine that Goebbels had, under Hitler, look like childs play.

Why, in every African country the USIS window has pictures in it, showing the passage of the civil rights bill to make it look like the problems of every Negro over here have been solved. Go in any African country, and you know before you get there whats going to be in the window. They use the passage of the civil rights bill to make it appear that Negroes arent being lynched any more, that Negroes voting rights arent being trampled upon any more, that police arent busting Negroes heads with clubs any more, nor are they using dogs and violence and water hoses to wash us down the drain. They make it appear that the civil rights bill created a paradise in the United States for the 22 million Negroes. This is the thing they call USIS. It does a very bad job of creating the wrong image and giving the wrong impression.

To show you how vicious they areIm within my rights to attack it; actually Im not attacking it, Im only analyzing it. On the 4th of November, the date that the election was over, the USIS circulated a document on me throughout the African continentknocking me, you know. Here I am, just a little old poor so-called Negro from Harlem, and theyre going to waste all their paper trying to tell Africans, Dont listen to what that man says, because he doesnt represent anything, and doesnt represent anybody, and has always been discredited. Thats your USIS. I say a prayer for them.

I want to say this too, in passing, for the benefit of our Muslim brothers and sisters who might be here from some of the Muslim countries, and might get a bit nervous over what Im saying, and the way Im saying it. This is not a religious meeting. When I come to a meeting sponsored by the OAAU, which is the Organization of Afro-American Unity, I put my religion in this pocket right here, and keep it here. And when I talk like this, it doesnt mean Im less religious, it means Im more religious.

I believe in a religion that believes in freedom. Any time I have to accept a religion that wont let me fight a battle for my people, I say to hell with that religion. Thats why I am a Muslim, because its a religion that teaches you an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. It teaches you to respect everybody, and treat everybody right. But it also teaches you if someone steps on your toe, chop off their foot. And I carry my religious axe with me all the time.

You know they have freedom movements on the African continent. There are many liberation movements; there are movements of Africans from South Africa, from Mozambique, from South-West Africa, Bechuanaland, Swaziland, Angola. In every country, in every area on the African continent that has not tossed aside the shackles of colonialism, they have developed a liberation movement, and the purpose of these liberation movements is to throw aside the oppressor.

After the summit conference, the most respected groups were these freedom fighters. The heads of the various liberation movements from the different parts of the African continent were all housed on a ship that was anchored in the Nile Rivera ship called the Isis. They were placed there so that they could all be together, and discuss the problems that they had in common. At the same time it was excellent for security purposes, because you cant get on a boat so easily.

I was blessed with the opportunity to live on that boat with the leaders of the liberation movements, because I represented an Afro-American liberation movementAfro-American freedom fighters. And all of us were on there together. It gave me an opportunity to study, to listen and study the type of people involved in the struggletheir thinking, their objectives, their aims and their methods. It opened my eyes to many things. And I think I was able to steal a few ideas that they used, and tactics and strategy, that will be most effective in your and my freedom struggle here in this country.

Some of them were nonviolentI didnt listen too long to any of those. And others really want freedom. When a person places a proper value on freedom, there is nothing under the sun that he will not do to acquire that freedom. Whenever you hear a man saying he wants freedom, but in the next breath he is going to tell you what he wont do to get it, or what he doesnt believe in doing in order to get it, he doesnt believe in freedom. A man who believes in freedom will do anything under the sun to acquire or achieve his freedom, and he will do anything under the sun to preserve his freedom. And the only reason you and I here in America dont yet have freedom is we havent yet matured to that stage where we can see this is the real price, or the real attitude, or the real approach that one must make.

I was, as I said, in Egypt, the United Arab Republic, for two months, and then left and went to Mecca, where I was for about a week; I was in Saudi Arabia for about a week, and Mecca a couple of days. I left there and went to Kuwait, where all the oil is, on the Persian Gulf, and from there to Beirut in Lebanon. After spending two months there, in the Middle East, then I went on into other parts of Africa, the first stop being Khartoum where, since then, theyve had a whole lot of troublewhich they should have had. Now everything is all settled; they had a revolution, and got people that didnt belong in power out of powerthats how you do it. And thats what they did, the students.

The students all over the world are the ones who bring about a change; old people dont bring about a change. I mean Im not saying this against anybody thats oldbecause if youre ready for some action youre not old, I dont care how old you are. But if youre not ready for some action, I dont care how young you are, youre old. As long as you want some action, youre young. But any time you begin to sit on the fence, and your toes start shaking because youre afraid too much action is going down, then youre too old; you need to get on out of the way. Some of us get too old while were still in our teens.

So, I went through Khartoum to Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, which is a wonderful country. It has its problems, and its still a wonderful country. Some of the most beautiful people Ive seen are in Ethiopia, and most intelligent and most dignified, right there in Ethiopia. You hear all kinds of propaganda about Ethiopia. But any time a person tries to tell you, as theyve told you and me, that Ethiopians dont think theyre the same as we are, thats some of that mans manufacturing. He made that up. You know who I mean when I say that man. Theyre just as friendly toward us as anybody else is.


I was there for about a week, and went on into Kenya, a place which really knocked me out. If ever I saw any Africans who looked like they have the potential for explosion, its our good Kikuyu brothers in Kenya. I was discussing my opinion of the people of Kenya, especially in Nairobi, with some friends while I was there, and I told them that I was looking at the faces of these people, and they looked like they can explode. And they do; they look like they can explode, more so than any place I went on the continent. You can just see, right in their faces, energy. Now if you channel it in the right direction, it goes in the right direction; if you let it go in the wrong direction, it goes in the wrong directionbut theyve got the energy, thats the most important thing.

And as proof that they can explode, they exploded the other day. When the United States, with her criminal action in the Congoand thats what it is, criminal action in the Congothey marched on the embassy there in Nairobi, tore it up. And that shows you what the Africans feel. They dont like to see anybody exploiting another African or oppressing another African; they stick together, and you and I can learn thats what were supposed to do. When something happens in Mississippi, we dont have to go to Mississippitheyve got some people that look just like those in Mississippi, right here.

My contention is, those up here are just as much responsible for whats happening down there as those down there. And when you and I let them know that we hold all of them responsible, then all of them will start acting right. Theyll keep those others in line. But as long as you and I make them think they can pass the buck, then they will be passing the buck, theyll be telling us, you know, Mississippi, and theyre doing the same thing right here.

So, when I left Kenya, I went to Zanzibar and Tanganyika; now its called Tanzania. And I never went anywhere that has pleased me more than that place. Its beautifulall of Africa is beautifulbut in Tanganyika, its a very beautiful place. Its hot, its like Miami, Miami is hot, and if these people pay as much money as they do to live in Miami, why, you know, the entire African continent where I went is just like Miami Beach. And theyre always telling you and me, you know, how difficult a time we would have trying to adjust if we went over there. Im telling you, if you want to integrate, go to Africa. There are more white people over there than there are over here. Thats where they all are. Theyre over there living like kings, basking in the sun.

And when we go back in that sense, then this spiritual bond that is created makes us inseparable, and they can see that our problem is their problem, and their problem is our problem. Our problem is not solved until theirs is solved, theirs is not solved until ours is solved. And when we can develop that kind of relationship, then it means that we will help them solve their problems, and we want them to help us solve our problems. And by both of us working together, well get a solution to that problem. We will only get that problem solved by working together.

This was the essence of every discussionthat the problems are one, that the destiny is the same, the origin is the same. Even the experiences are the same; they catch hell, we catch hell. And no matter how much independence theyve got, on that land, on the mother continent, if we dont have it over here, and dont have respect over here, when they come over here they are mistaken for one of us and they are disrespected too. So in order to be respected, we must be respected.

And I say, brothers and sisters, theyre beginning to see this. Theyre beginning to see that the problems are one. They are interested in our problems, but they were shocked to learn that we were also interested in their problems. And if I would have any advice to give to our people here in the Western Hemisphere, I would say that it has been almost criminal on our part, all the organizations that we have, for us not to have tried to make some kind of direct contact, direct communication, with our brothers on the African continent before.

We should never let the white man represent us to them, and we should never let him represent them to us. It is our job today to represent ourselves, as they are representing themselves. We dont need someone else representing us. We dont want anybody to tell somebody how we think We will let the world know how we think We dont want any handkerchief-head set up by the State Department as a spokesman for us, telling the world how we think; we want the world to know how we think We want the world to know we dont like what Sam is doing in the Congo to our brothers and sisters.

I must say this, in brief. I was talking to a brother from the Congo, who was very angry. I was in Tanganyika, he had just come from Leopoldville, and he was very angry because he told me that out of all of the paratroopers, or eighty paratroopersyoull have to stop handing me these things while Im up here, its getting like Grand Central Station, you send my mind somewhere else. He was telling me that he was very angry at American Negroes. And he was talking about us, you know, like a dog. Not me, because he knows what I represent. The best thing the white man ever did for me was to make me look like a monster all over the world. Because I can go any place on the African continent and our African brothers know where I stand.

He was angry because he said that most of the paratroopers, the American soldiers that were guarding these transports that Tshombe was using, were American Negroes; that they put American soldiers in there. I never had a chance to check it out. Normally I wouldnt stand up in a public meeting and say it, but when I first heard it, and I heard it from an Afro-American who works over there, I went to track this brother from the Congo down. Hes a very intelligent fellow, and he said "Yes," and he was hot, you know. And so I sat down to let him know that all of us dont think like that. That they had to go all over the United States with a microscope and find that many Negroes dumb enough to let themselves be sent to the Congoimagine, a Negro that lets himself be sent to the Congo!in a uniform, against people who look just like he does. Why, he should be shot. So I let him know that that wasnt us, that was somebody else.

Also, brothers and sisters, you know Tshombe. Youve heard of him. From what I understand, Tshombe arrives in the United States on Tuesday. Hes got a whole lot of nerve. The best thing they did for him in Cairo was when they locked him up. That protected him. Because Tshombe cant go to any country where there are true black men, true black men, and walk the street in safety. This is the worst African that was ever born. The worst African that was ever born. This is the man who in cold blood, cold blood, committed an international crimemurdered Patrice Lumumba, murdered him in cold blood. The world knows that Tshombe murdered Lumumba. And now hes a bed partner for Lyndon B. Johnson. Yes, a bed partner. Theyre sleeping together, theyre sleeping together. When I say sleeping together, I dont mean that literally. But beyond that theyre in the same bed. Johnson is paying the salaries, paying the government, propping up Tshombes government, this murderer. It is the Lyndon B. Johnson administration, the man you voted foryou were insane, out of your mind, out of your head, to vote for a man like that; drunk But I dont blame you, you just were tricked. I told you a fox will always get business.

So Tshombe arrives here on Tuesday. And many of our brothers that belong to the African student association plan to give him a welcome. Shucks, I have a religion that believes in hospitality. Everybody should be welcomeaccording to their just desserts. So the brother thats involved in this, I think Sidi Aliwhere is he? Sidi Ali, come and give this announcement. This is our brother, Sidi Ali of Ghana.

[Sidi Ali speaks.]

Brothers and sisters, I have some quick announcements.

Next week the Audubon is not available, so our next meeting will be on the 13th, which will be two weeks from tonight. At that time the topic will be "The Congo Crisis." I imagine the crisis wont be over. Because its of such nature that theyre in there now and they cant come out with clean hands. Its almost impossible for them to pull out. They went in there and killed people; now, when they pull back out, what do you think will happen? They cant get out of it like that.

One thing you must always bear in mind, as our brother pointed out, these young brothers that are in the Stanleyville area, Oriental Province, are not rebels, as the press continues to refer to them. They call themselves Simbas, which means lions, you know, meaning theyve got it. Theyre freedom fighters, and your and my heart should be with theirs. They are men, they are men, the proof of which is they are dying to get their freedom. Theyre killing too, but so what? Theyve been killed themselvesall they do is believe in equality. Whats good for the goose is good for the goose.

Also, always bear in mind, that the only Congolese soldiers that are winning any battles, or that have won any battles, have been those brothers who are the freedom fighters. The Congolese soldiers that fight for Tshombe dont win battles. They were giving up in the face of the freedom fighters. They were giving up the entire Congo. They were evacuating the place and the United States got desperate. Thats why they went and got Tshombe, went all the way up in Spain, where Tshombe had retired, had given up, was living the life, and they talked him into going back to the Congo and becoming the premier.

As soon as they got him back into position as premier, the first thing he did was bring in some white mercenaries, murderersbecause thats what a mercenary means, it means a hired killer. And this government, the United States government, supplies the salaries for these hired killers from your tax dollars. Every time you pay your taxes you are paying the salary for those white blue-eyed murderers there in the Congo who are killing the Congolese. Theres nobody in the State Department can deny it.

In fact, I read in the paper today where Lyndon B. Johnson said hed take full responsibility. He should take full responsibility. Hes pulling the same kind of an act over there in the Congo that theyve been pulling in Texas on you and me for the past two or three hundred years. Thats a Texas act. You know what kind of act goes on in Texas. But they cant win because the only way Tshombe can remain premier is with help from the outside. He must get white help. So, as long as Tshombe remains the premier of the Congo, it means the white man is going to have to continue sending white soldiers in there to rescue him. And hell lose every white soldier he has, hell lose them in there.
So, those brothers know what theyre doingin fact, what you and I need to do. What you and I need to do. Many of us are vets, weve had all kind of experience. Youve seen all kinds of action, havent you? But youve never seen any action for yourself, and youve never seen any action for anybody who is of your own land. Many of you are unemployed. We might put on a drive right here in Harlem to raise up some black mercenaries to take over there to show them what to do.

You see, theres some kind of cultural, psychological block in the minds of our brothers there, or these white mercenaries wouldnt have the advantage. All they have is the psychological advantage. They wouldnt have that on you and me. You and I dont have that block, we dont have that cultural block because they destroyed our culture. We can think just like they think now. We can do the same thing they can do. You just give me ten black ones and well eat up fifty of those white ones. Eat them up.

And theres nothing wrong with that. Why? Because this government, this same government has recruited what they call anti-Castro Cubans. Which means theyre American. And this government sends them over there to bomb the Congolese. But theyre afraid to say that theyre American pilots, so they say theyre anti-Castro Cuban pilots. Okay, weve got black people who can fly planesweve been flying them for the man. Instead of you sitting around here driving a bus, remember how you used to fly a plane for him, get on over there and get with it on the right side. If they can send white ones against black ones, we can recruit and send black ones against white ones. I frankly believe that it would be most exciting. I know a whole lot of Afro-Americans would go for freewould go for fun. We dont need any money, we just want to get even.

Now, Im going to tell you what theyre going to do, because I know them. In the paper tomorrow youre going to read that a whole lot of frantic, you know, statements were made. As long as there are white people going over there shooting black people, nothing is saidthey glorify them. But when you and I start talking like we want to do the same thing to some of them, then were fanatics, were bloodthirsty. But I think then the white man should know one thingwhen I say white man, Im not saying all of you, whatever you are, because some of you might be all right. And whichever one of you acts all right with me, youre all right with me, as long as you act all right. But if you dont act all right, youre not all right. All youve got to do to be all right with me is act all right. But dont come thinking youre all right just because youre white. 
I think that point has to be made because if you dont clarify it, they go out of here saying youre a racist, that youre against all white people. Were not against all white people. Were against all those that arent right, all of them that arent right.

We purposely arent going to have any question and answer period tonight. I dont think we need one. But we are going to take up a collection because we pay for this hall and we wont be able to get back here two weeks from now unless we pay for it. And when I say we pay for it, you know, we. Just let me take five minutes right now real quick before I forget while the brothers are coming to take up a collection.

And again, as soon as you start taking up a collection, youll read in the papers tomorrow morning: "what they didthey took up a collection." They write like theyre out of their mind. They always are intelligent until they come around us. When you read what they write someplace else, they write intelligently. But when we let them in here and let them write, then they write things that arent even of interest. [Shouts from the audience.] You say, Why let them in? Sometime Ill tell you why I let them in. But if you dont want them in here, then keep them out.

[During the collection, Malcolm makes further announcements. He reports the arrival of an African Muslim teacher from Mecca and tells when and where he will be speaking. To offset any feeling of religious favoritism, he offers to make an announcement for (any) church you belong to, church or synagogue. He promises an effort will be made to get scholars and experts from the United Nations to speak at the next rally, So we wont have to go by what we read in the newspapers. Then he continues:]

I think our brother, Sidi Ali, did a wonderful job in destroying that myth about cannibalism. The man is always trying to make it look like our people are cannibals. The only cannibal Ive ever seen, the only persons Ive ever seen who eat up people, are those people. Not our people, those people. Im not saying who those people are, whoever fits "those." And usually they end up trying to put all those characteristics on us to hide their own guilt. They shouldnt do that. It should be emphasized over and over and over by you and me that we arent racists. One of the worst categories to let them put you in is the category of racist.

Im not a racist. I dont judge a man because of his color. I get suspicious of a lot of them and cautious around a lot of themfrom experience. Not because of their color, but because of what experience has taught me concerning their overall behavior toward us. So, please dont ever go away saying that we are against people because of their color. We are against them because of what they do to us and because of what they do to others. All they have to do to get our good will is to show their good will and stop doing all those dirty things to our people. Is that understood?

Also, within the next couple of weeks we will spell out the type of support we got on our effort to bring the United States into the United Nations and charge her with violating our human rights. You and I must take this government before a world forum and show the world that this government has absolutely failed in its duty toward us. It has failed from Washington, D.C., all the way in to New York City. They have failed in their duty toward you and me. They have failed to protect us, they have failed to represent us, they have failed to respect us. And since they have failed, either willingly or because of their inability, we think that they should be brought up there so the world can see them as they actually are.

Now, if this government doesnt want to have her linen washed in public, then we give her a week or two to get her house in order. And if she cant get it in order in two weeks, then get on out there with South Africa and Portugal and the rest of those criminals who have been exploiting and abusing dark-skinned people now for far too long. Were all fed up. Right? Right.

[Malcolm introduces Jesse Gray, who suggests that the place to send black mercenaries is Mississippi, and concludes: Its always very easy for us to be ready to move and ready to talk and ready to act, but unless we truly get down into the heart of the ghetto and begin to deal with the problems of jobs, schools, and the other basic questions, we are going to be unable to deal with any revolutionary perspective, or with any revolution for that matter. Malcolm then says:]

That was our brother Jesse Gray, the leader of the Harlem rent strikes, and what he said is true. When I speak of some action for the Congo, that action also includes Congo, Mississippi. But the point and thing that I would like to impress upon every Afro-American leader is that there is no kind of action in this country ever going to bear fruit unless that action is tied in with the overall international struggle.

You waste your time when you talk to this man, just you and him. So when you talk to him, let him know your brother is behind you, and youve got some more brothers behind that brother. Thats the only way to talk to him, thats the only language he knows. Why do I say, Make sure your brother is behind you? Because youre going to have to fight this man, believe me, yes, youre going to have to fight him. Youre going to have to fight him. He doesnt know any other language.

You can go and talk that old pretty talk to him, he doesnt even hear you. He says yes, yes, yes. You know, you cant communicate if one man is speaking French and the other one is speaking German. Theyve both got to speak the same language. Well, in this country youre dealing with a man who has a language. Find out what that language is. Once you know what language he speaks in, then you can talk to him. And if you want to know what his language is, study his history. His language is blood, his language is power, his language is brutality, his language is everything thats brutal.

And if you cant talk that talk, he doesnt even hear you. You can come talking that old sweet talk, or that old peace talk, or that old nonviolent talkthat man doesnt hear that kind of talk. Hell pat you on your back and tell you youre a good boy and give you a peace prize. How are you going to get a peace prize when the wars not over yet? Im for peace, but the only way youre going to preserve peace is be prepared for war.

Never let anybody tell you and me the odds are against usI dont even want to hear that. Those who think the odds are against you, forget it. The odds are not against you. The odds are against you only when youre scared. The only things that makes odds against you is a scared mind. When you get all of that fright off of you, theres no such thing as odds against you. Because when a man knows that when he starts playing with you, hes got to kill you, that man is not going to play with you. But if he knows when hes playing with you that youre going to back up and be nonviolent and peaceful and respectable and responsible, why, you and me will never come out of his claws.

Let him know that youre peaceful, let him know that youre respectful and you respect him, and that youre law-abiding, and that you want to be a good citizen, and all those right-thinking things. But let him know at the same time that youre ready to do to him what hes been trying to do to you. And then youll always have peace. Youll always have it. Learn a lesson from history, learn a lesson from history.

I must say this once before we close. I dont want you to think that Im coming back here to rabble-rouse, or to get somebody excited. I dont think you have to excite our people; the man already has excited us. And I dont want you to think that Im ready for some unintelligent action, or some irresponsible action, or for just any old thing just to be doing something. No. I hope that all of us can sit down with a cool head and a clear mind and analyze the situation, in the back room, anywhere, analyze the situation; and after we give the proper analysis of what were confronted by, then let us be bold enough to take whatever steps that analysis says must be taken. Once we get it, then lets do it, and well be able to get some kind of result in this freedom struggle.

But dont let anybody who is oppressing us ever lay the ground rules. Dont go by their game, dont play the game by their rules. Let them know now that this is a new game, and weve got some new rules, and these rules mean anything goes, anything goes. Are you with me, brothers? I know youre with me.

So, again I thank you and we will look for all of you out here, if possible, two weeks from tonight on the 13th of December. By the way, I want to tell you, I was in Paris Monday night before Alioune Diops group, Presence Africaine. Many of our people in Paris, as well as from the African continent, are organizing, and they are just as concerned with what is going on over here as you and I are. You and I have to link up with our people who are in Pariswhen I say our people, you know, uswe have to link up with our people who are in London, England. Weve got a whole lot of them over there, brothers, I saw them.

Weve got to link up with our people who are in the Caribbean, in Trinidad, in Jamaica, in all the islands, and weve got to link up with our people who are in Central America and South America. Everywhere you see someone who looks like us, weve got to get together. And once we get together, brothers, we can get some action, because well find we are not the underdog. All those odds this mans talking about dont exist. He put them in our mindsright or wrong? Very good. So we thank you, and well see you in two weeks. May Allah bless you.

I intend for my talk to be very informal, because our position in America is an informal position, and I find that it is very difficult to use formal terms to describe a very informal position. No condition of any people on earth is more deplorable than the condition, or plight, of the twenty-two million Black people in America. And our condition is so deplorable because we are in a country that professes to be a democracy and professes to be striving to give justice and freedom and equality to everyone who is born under its constitution. If we were born in South Africa or in Angola or some part of this earth where they dont profess to be for freedom, that would be another thing; but when we are born in a country that stands up and represents itself as the leader of the Free World, and you still have to beg and crawl just to get a chance to drink a cup of coffee, then the condition is very deplorable indeed.


So tonight, so that you will understand me and why I speak as I do, it should probably be pointed out at the outset that I am not a politician. I dont know anything about politics. Im from America but Im not an American. I didnt go there of my own free choice. If I were an American there would be no problem, thered be no need for legislation or civil rights or anything else. So I just try to face the fact as it actually is and come to this meeting as one of the victims of America, one of the victims of Americanism, one of the victims of democracy, one of the victims of a very hypocritical system that is going all over this earth today representing itself as being qualified to tell other people how to run their country when they cant get the dirty things that are going on in their own country straightened out.

So if someone else from America comes to you to speak, theyre probably speaking as Americans, and they speak as people who see America through the eyes of an American. And usually those types of persons refer to America, or that which exists in America, as the American Dream. But for the twenty million of us in America who are of African descent, it is not an American dream; its an American nightmare.

I dont feel that I am a visitor in Ghana or in any part of Africa. I feel that I am at home. Ive been away for four hundred years, but not of my own volition, not of my own will. Our people didnt go to America on the Queen Mary, we didnt go by Pan American, and we didnt go to America on the Mayflower. We went in slave ships, we went in chains. We werent immigrants to America, we were cargo for purposes of a system that was bent upon making a profit. So this is the category or level of which I speak. I may not speak it in the language many of you would use, but I think you will understand the meaning of my terms.

When I was in Ibadan at the University of Ibadan last Friday night, the students there gave me a new name, which I go for  meaning I like it. Omowale, which they say means in Yoruba  if I am pronouncing that correctly, and if I am not pronouncing it correctly its because I havent had a chance to pronounce it for four hundred years  which means in that dialect, The child has returned. It was an honor for me to be referred to as a child who had sense enough to return to the land of his forefathers  to his fatherland and to his motherland. Not sent back here by the State Department, but come back here of my own free will.

I am happy and I imagine, since it is the policy that whenever a Black man leaves America and travels in any part of Africa, or Asia, or Latin America and says things contrary to what the American propaganda machine turns out, usually he finds upon his return home that his passport is lifted. Well, if they had not wanted me to say the things I am saying, they should never have given me a passport in the first place. The policy usually is the lifting of the passport. Now I am not here to condemn America, I am not here to make America look bad, but I am here to tell you the truth about the situation that Black people in America find themselves confronted with. And if truth condemns America, then she stands condemned.

This is the most beautiful continent that Ive ever seen; its the richest continent Ive ever seen, and strange as it may seem, I find many white Americans here smiling in the faces of our African brothers like they have been loving them all of the time. The fact is, these same whites who in America spit in our faces, the same whites who in America club us brutally, the same whites who in America sic their dogs upon us, just because we want to be free human beings, the same whites who turn their water hoses upon our women and our babies because we want to integrate with them, are over here in Africa smiling in your face trying to integrate with you.

I had to write a letter back home yesterday and tell some of my friends that if American Negroes want integration, they should come to Africa, because more white people over here  white Americans, that is  look like they are for integration than there is in the entire American country. But actually what it is, they want to integrate with the wealth that they know is here  the untapped natural resources which exceed the wealth of any continent on this earth today.

When I was coming from Lagos to Accra Sunday, I was riding on an airplane with a white man who represented some of the interests, you know, that are interested in Africa. And he admitted  at least it was his impression  that our people in Africa didnt know how to measure wealth, that they worship wealth in terms of gold and silver, not in terms of the natural resources that are in the earth, and that as long as the Americans or other imperialists or twentieth-century colonialists could continue to make the Africans measure wealth in terms of gold and silver, they never would have an opportunity to really measure the value of the wealth that is in the soil, and would continue to think that it is they who need the Western powers instead of thinking that it is the Western powers who need the people and the continent that is known as Africa. The thing is, I hope I dont mess up anybodys politics or anybodys plots or plans or schemes, but then I think that it can be well proved and backed up.

Ghana is one of the most progressive nations on the African continent primarily because it has one of the most progressive leaders and most progressive presidents. The president of this nation has done something that no American, no white American, wants to see done  well, I should say no American because all the Americans over there are white Americans.

President Nkrumah is doing something there that the government in America does not like to see done, and that is hes restoring the African image. He is making the African proud of the African image; and whenever the African becomes proud of the African image and this positive image is projected abroad, then the Black man in America, who up to now has had nothing but a negative image of Africa  automatically the image that the Black man in America has of his African brothers changes from negative to positive, and the image that the Black man in America has of himself will also change from negative to positive.

And the American racists know that they can rule the African in America, the African-American in America, only as long as we have a negative image of ourselves. So they keep us with a negative image of Africa. And they also know that the day that the image of Africa is changed from negative to positive, automatically the attitude of twenty-two million Africans in America will also change from negative to positive.

And one of the most important efforts to change the image of the African is being made right here in Ghana. And the Ghanaian personality can be picked right out of any group of Africans anywhere on this planet, because you see nothing in him that reflects any kind of feeling of inferiority or anything of that sort. And as long as you have a president who teaches you that you can do anything that anybody else under the sun can do, you got a good man.

Not only that, we who live in America have learned to measure Black men: the object we use to measure him is the attitude of America toward him. When we find a Black man whos always receiving the praise of the Americans, we become suspicious of him. When we find a Black man who receives honors and all kinds of plaques and beautiful phrases and words from America, we immediately begin to suspect that person. Because it has been our experience that the Americans dont praise any Black man who is really working for the benefit of the Black man, because they realize that when you begin to work in earnest to do things that are good for the people on the African continent, all the good you do for people on the African continent has got to be against someone else, because someone else up to now has benefited from the labor and the wealth of the people on this continent. So our yardstick in measuring these various leaders is to find out what the Americans think about them. And these leaders over here who are receiving the praise and pats on the back from the Americans, you can just flush the toilet and let them go right down the drain.

This president here is disliked. Dont think that its just the American press, its the government. In America when you find a concerted effort of the press to always speak in a bad way about an African leader, usually that press is actually reflecting government opinion. But America is a very shrewd government. If it knows that its own governmental position will cause a negative reaction from the people that it wants to continue to exploit, it will pretend to have a free press and at the same time sic that free press on a real African leader and stand on the sideline and say that this is not government policy. But everything that happens in America is government policy.

Not only is the president of this country disliked, the president of Algeria, Ben Bella, is disliked because he is revolutionary, hes for freedom of everybody. Nasser is disliked because hes for freedom of everybody. All of them are referred to as dictators. As soon as they get the mass of their people behind them, theyre a dictator. As soon as they have unity of their people in their country, theyre a dictator. If there is no division, fighting, and squabbling going on, the leader of that country is a dictator if he is an African; but as long as it is in America, hes just an American president who has the support of the people.

I am coming to America in a minute, but I just want to comment on our relations Ive noticed since being here. I heard that there is a conflict among some of our brothers and sisters over here concerning whether or not its advisable for the government to play such a prominent role in guiding the education  the curriculum and what not  of the people of the country and in the various universities. Yes, any time you have a people who have been colonized for as long as our people have been colonized, and you tell them now they can vote, they will spend all night arguing and never get anywhere. Everything needs to be controlled until the colonial mentality has been completely destroyed, and when that colonial mentality has been destroyed at least to the point where they know what they are voting for, then you give them a chance to vote on this and vote on that. But we have this trouble in America, as well as other areas where colonialism has existed, the only way they can practice or apply democratic practices is through advice and counsel.

So my own honest, humble opinion is, anytime you want to come out from under a colonial mentality, let the government set up the educational system and educate you in the direction or way they want you to go in; and then after your understanding is up to the level where it should be, you can stand around and argue or philosophize or something of that sort.

There is probably no more enlightened leader on the African continent than President Nkrumah, because he lived in America. He knows what it is like there. He could not live in that land as long as he did and be disillusioned, or confused, or be deceived. Anytime you think that America is the land of the free, you come there and take off your national dress and be mistaken for an American Negro, and you will find out youre not in the land of the free. America is a colonial power. She is just as much a colonial power in 1964 as France, Britain, Portugal, and all these other European countries were in 1864. Shes a twentieth-century colonial power; shes a modern colonial power, and she has colonized twenty-two million African-Americans. While there are only eleven million Africans colonized in South Africa, four or five million colonized in Angola, there are twenty-two million Africans colonized in America right now on May 13, 1964. What is second-class citizenship if nothing but twentieth-century colonialism? They dont want you to know that slavery still exists, so rather than call it slavery they call it second-class citizenship.

Either you are a citizen or you are not a citizen at all. If you are a citizen, you are free; if you are not a citizen, you are a slave. And the American government is afraid to admit that she never gave freedom to the Black man in America and wont even admit that the Black man in America is not free, is not a citizen, and doesnt have his rights. She skillfully camouflages it under these pretty terms of second-class citizenship. Its colonialism, neocolonialism, imperialism.

One of our brothers just landed here today from New York. He told me that when he left New York, the police were walking in Harlem six abreast. Why? Because Harlem is about to explode. You know what I mean by Harlem? Harlem is the most famous city on this earth; there is no city on the African continent with as many Africans as Harlem. In Harlem they call it little Africa, and when you walk through Harlem, youre in Ibadan, everyone there looks just like you. And today the police were out in force, with their clubs. They dont have police dogs in Harlem, cause those kind of people who live in Harlem dont allow police dogs to come in Harlem. Thats the point, they dont allow police dogs to come in Harlem.

They are troubled with the existence of little gangs who have been going around killing people, killing white people. Well now, they project it abroad as an anti-white gang. No, its not an anti-white gang, its an anti-oppression gang. Its an anti-frustration gang. They dont know what else to do. Theyve been waiting for the government to solve their problems; theyve been waiting for the president to solve their problems; theyve been waiting for the Senate and the Congress and the Supreme Court to solve their problems; theyve been waiting for Negro leaders to solve their problems; and all they hear are a lot of pretty words. So they become frustrated and dont know what to do. So they do the only thing they know how: they do the same thing the Americans did when they got frustrated with the British in 1776  liberty or death.

This is what the Americans did; they didnt turn the other cheek to the British. No, they had an old man named Patrick Henry who said, Liberty or death! I never heard them refer to him as an advocate of violence; they say hes one of the Founding Fathers, because he had sense to say, Liberty or death!

And there is a growing tendency among Black Americans today, who are able to see that they dont have freedom  they are reaching the point now where they are ready to tell the Man no matter what the odds are against them, no matter what the cost is, its liberty or death. If this is the land of the free, then give us some freedom. If this is the land of justice, then give us some justice. And if this is the land of equality, give us some equality. This is the growing temper of the Black American, of the African-American, of which there are twenty-two million.

Am I justified in talking like this? Let me see. I was in Cleveland, Ohio, just two months ago when this white clergyman was killed by the bulldozer. I was in Cleveland, I was there. Now you know if a white man in the garb, in the outfit, the costume, or whatever you want to call it, of a priest...if they run over him with a bulldozer, what will they do to a Black man? They run over someone who looks like them who is demonstrating for freedom, what chance does a Black man have? This wasnt in Mississippi, this was in Cleveland in the North. This is the type of experience the Black man in America is faced with every day.

Mr. Moderator, Brother Lomax, brothers and sisters, friends...and enemies. I just cant believe everyone in here is a friend, and I dont want to leave anybody out. The question tonight, as I understand it, is The Negro Revolt, and Where Do We Go From Here? or What Next? In my little humble way of understanding it, it points toward either the ballot or the bullet. Before we try and explain what is meant by the ballot or the bullet, I would like to clarify something concerning myself.

Im still a Muslim; my religion is still Islam. Thats my personal belief. Just as Adam Clayton Powell is a Christian minister who heads the Abyssinian Baptist Church in New York, but at the same time takes part in the political struggles to try and bring about rights to the black people in this country; and Dr. Martin Luther King is a Christian minister down in Atlanta, Georgia, who heads another organization fighting for the civil rights of black people in this country; and Reverend Galamison, I guess youve heard of him, is another Christian minister in New York who has been deeply involved in the school boycotts to eliminate segregated education; well, I myself am a minister, not a Christian minister, but a Muslim minister; and I believe in action on all fronts by whatever means necessary.

Although Im still a Muslim, Im not here tonight to discuss my religion. Im not here to try and change your religion. Im not here to argue or discuss anything that we differ about, because its time for us to submerge our differences and realize that it is best for us to first see that we have the same problem, a common problem, a problem that will make you catch hell whether youre a Baptist, or a Methodist, or a Muslim, or a nationalist.

Whether youre educated or illiterate, whether you live on the boulevard or in the alley, youre going to catch hell just like I am. Were all in the same boat and we all are going to catch the same hell from the same man. He just happens to be a white man. All of us have suffered here, in this country, political oppression at the hands of the white man, economic exploitation at the hands of the white man, and social degradation at the hands of the white man.

Now in speaking like this, it doesnt mean that were anti-white, but it does mean were anti-exploitation, were anti-degradation, were anti-oppression. And if the white man doesnt want us to be anti-him, let him stop oppressing and exploiting and degrading us. Whether we are Christians or Muslims or nationalists or agnostics or atheists, we must first learn to forget our differences. If we have differences, let us differ in the closet; when we come out in front, let us not have anything to argue about until we get finished arguing with the man. If the late President Kennedy could get together with Khrushchev and exchange some wheat, we certainly have more in common with each other than Kennedy and Khrushchev had with each other.

If we dont do something real soon, I think youll have to agree that were going to be forced either to use the ballot or the bullet. Its one or the other in 1964. It isnt that time is running outtime has run out!

1964 threatens to be the most explosive year America has ever witnessed. The most explosive year. Why? Its also a political year. Its the year when all of the white politicians will be back in the so-called Negro community jiving you and me for some votes. The year when all of the white political crooks will be right back in your and my community with their false promises, building up our hopes for a letdown, with their trickery and their treachery, with their false promises which they dont intend to keep. As they nourish these dissatisfactions, it can only lead to one thing, an explosion; and now we have the type of black man on the scene in America todayIm sorry, Brother Lomaxwho just doesnt intend to turn the other cheek any longer.

Dont let anybody tell you anything about the odds are against you. If they draft you, they send you to Korea and make you face 800 million Chinese. If you can be brave over there, you can be brave right here. These odds arent as great as those odds. And if you fight here, you will at least know what youre fighting for.

Im not a politician, not even a student of politics; in fact, Im not a student of much of anything. Im not a Democrat. Im not a Republican, and I dont even consider myself an American. If you and I were Americans, thered be no problem. Those Honkies that just got off the boat, theyre already Americans; Polacks are already Americans; the Italian refugees are already Americans. Everything that came out of Europe, every blue-eyed thing, is already an American. And as long as you and I have been over here, we arent Americans yet.

Well, I am one who doesnt believe in deluding myself. Im not going to sit at your table and watch you eat, with nothing on my plate, and call myself a diner. Sitting at the table doesnt make you a diner, unless you eat some of whats on that plate. Being here in America doesnt make you an American. Being born here in America doesnt make you an American. Why, if birth made you American, you wouldnt need any legislation; you wouldnt need any amendments to the Constitution; you wouldnt be faced with civil-rights filibustering in Washington, D.C., right now. They dont have to pass civil-rights legislation to make a Polack an American.

No, Im not an American. Im one of the 22 million black people who are the victims of Americanism. One of the 22 million black people who are the victims of democracy, nothing but disguised hypocrisy. So, Im not standing here speaking to you as an American, or a patriot, or a flag-saluter, or a flag-waverno, not I. Im speaking as a victim of this American system. And I see America through the eyes of the victim. I dont see any American dream; I see an American nightmare.

These 22 million victims are waking up. Their eyes are coming open. Theyre beginning to see what they used to only look at. Theyre becoming politically mature. They are realizing that there are new political trends from coast to coast. As they see these new political trends, its possible for them to see that every time theres an election the races are so close that they have to have a recount. They had to recount in Massachusetts to see who was going to be governor, it was so close. It was the same way in Rhode Island, in Minnesota, and in many other parts of the country. And the same with Kennedy and Nixon when they ran for president. It was so close they had to count all over again. Well, what does this mean? It means that when white people are evenly divided, and black people have a bloc of votes of their own, it is left up to them to determine whos going to sit in the White House and whos going to be in the dog house.


lt was the black mans vote that put the present administration in Washington, D.C. Your vote, your dumb vote, your ignorant vote, your wasted vote put in an administration in Washington, D.C., that has seen fit to pass every kind of legislation imaginable, saving you until last, then filibustering on top of that. And your and my leaders have the audacity to run around clapping their hands and talk about how much progress were making. And what a good president we have. If he wasnt good in Texas, he sure cant be good in Washington, D.C. Because Texas is a lynch state. It is in the same breath as Mississippi, no different; only they lynch you in Texas with a Texas accent and lynch you in Mississippi with a Mississippi accent. And these Negro leaders have the audacity to go and have some coffee in the White House with a Texan, a Southern crackerthats all he isand then come out and tell you and me that hes going to be better for us because, since hes from the South, he knows how to deal with the Southerners. What kind of logic is that? Let Eastland be president, hes from the South too. He should be better able to deal with them than Johnson.

In this present administration they have in the House of Representatives 257 Democrats to only 177 Republicans. They control two-thirds of the House vote. Why cant they pass something that will help you and me? In the Senate, there are 67 senators who are of the Democratic Party. Only 33 of them are Republicans. Why, the Democrats have got the government sewed up, and youre the one who sewed it up for them. And what have they given you for it? Four years in office, and just now getting around to some civil-rights legislation. Just now, after everything else is gone, out of the way, theyre going to sit down now and play with you all summer longthe same old giant con game that they call filibuster. All those are in cahoots together. Dont you ever think theyre not in cahoots together, for the man that is heading the civil-rights filibuster is a man from Georgia named Richard Russell. When Johnson became president, the first man he asked for when he got back to Washington, D.C., was Dickythats how tight they are. Thats his boy, thats his pal, thats his buddy. But theyre playing that old con game. One of them makes believe hes for you, and hes got it fixed where the other one is so tight against you, he never has to keep his promise.

So its time in 1964 to wake up. And when you see them coming up with that kind of conspiracy, let them know your eyes are open. And let them know your eyes are something else thats wide open too. Its got to be the ballot or the bullet. The ballot or the bullet. If youre afraid to use an expression like that, you should get on out of the country; you should get back in the cotton patch; you should get back in the alley. They get all the Negro vote, and after they get it, the Negro gets nothing in return. All they did when they got to Washington was give a few big Negroes big jobs. Those big Negroes didnt need big jobs, they already had jobs. Thats camouflage, thats trickery, thats treachery, window-dressing. Im not trying to knock out the Democrats for the Republicans. Well get to them in a minute. But it is true; you put the Democrats first and the Democrats put you last.

Look at it the way it is. What alibis do they use, since they control Congress and the Senate? What alibi do they use when you and I ask, Well, when are you going to keep your promise? They blame the Dixiecrats. What is a Dixiecrat? A Democrat. A Dixiecrat is nothing but a Democrat in disguise. The titular head of the Democrats is also the head of the Dixiecrats, because the Dixiecrats are a part of the Democratic Party. The Democrats have never kicked the Dixiecrats out of the party. The Dixiecrats bolted themselves once, but the Democrats didnt put them out. Imagine, these lowdown Southern segregationists put the Northern Democrats down. But the Northern Democrats have never put the Dixiecrats down. No, look at that thing the way it is. They have got a con game going on, a political con game, and you and I are in the middle. Its time for you and me to wake up and start looking at it like it is, and trying to understand it like it is; and then we can deal with it like it is.

The Dixiecrats in Washington, D.C., control the key committees that run the government. The only reason the Dixiecrats control these committees is because they have seniority. The only reason they have seniority is because they come from states where Negroes cant vote. This is not even a government thats based on democracy. lt is not a government that is made up of representatives of the people. Half of the people in the South cant even vote. Eastland is not even supposed to be in Washington. Half of the senators and congressmen who occupy these key positions in Washington, D.C., are there illegally, are there unconstitutionally.

I was in Washington, D.C., a week ago Thursday, when they were debating whether or not they should let the bill come onto the floor. And in the back of the room where the Senate meets, theres a huge map of the United States, and on that map it shows the location of Negroes throughout the country. And it shows that the Southern section of the country, the states that are most heavily concentrated with Negroes, are the ones that have senators and congressmen standing up filibustering and doing all other kinds of trickery to keep the Negro from being able to vote. This is pitiful. But its not pitiful for us any longer; its actually pitiful for the white man, because soon now, as the Negro awakens a little more and sees the vise that hes in, sees the bag that hes in, sees the real game that hes in, then the Negros going to develop a new tactic.

These senators and congressmen actually violate the constitutional amendments that guarantee the people of that particular state or county the right to vote. And the Constitution itself has within it the machinery to expel any representative from a state where the voting rights of the people are violated. You dont even need new legislation. Any person in Congress right now, who is there from a state or a district where the voting rights of the people are violated, that particular person should be expelled from Congress. And when you expel him, youve removed one of the obstacles in the path of any real meaningful legislation in this country. In fact, when you expel them, you dont need new legislation, because they will be replaced by black representatives from counties and districts where the black man is in the majority, not in the minority.

If the black man in these Southern states had his full voting rights, the key Dixiecrats in Washington, D. C., which means the key Democrats in Washington, D.C., would lose their seats. The Democratic Party itself would lose its power. It would cease to be powerful as a party. When you see the amount of power that would be lost by the Democratic Party if it were to lose the Dixiecrat wing, or branch, or element, you can see where its against the interests of the Democrats to give voting rights to Negroes in states where the Democrats have been in complete power and authority ever since the Civil War. You just cant belong to that Party without analyzing it.

I say again, Im not anti-Democrat, Im not anti-Republican, Im not anti-anything. Im just questioning their sincerity, and some of the strategy that theyve been using on our people by promising them promises that they dont intend to keep. When you keep the Democrats in power, youre keeping the Dixiecrats in power. I doubt that my good Brother Lomax will deny that. A vote for a Democrat is a vote for a Dixiecrat. Thats why, in 1964, its time now for you and me to become more politically mature and realize what the ballot is for; what were supposed to get when we cast a ballot; and that if we dont cast a ballot, its going to end up in a situation where were going to have to cast a bullet. Its either a ballot or a bullet.

In the North, they do it a different way. They have a system thats known as gerrymandering, whatever that means. It means when Negroes become too heavily concentrated in a certain area, and begin to gain too much political power, the white man comes along and changes the district lines. You may say, Why do you keep saying white man? Because its the white man who does it. I havent ever seen any Negro changing any lines. They dont let him get near the line. Its the white man who does this. And usually, its the white man who grins at you the most, and pats you on the back, and is supposed to be your friend. He may be friendly, but hes not your friend.

So, what Im trying to impress upon you, in essence, is this: You and I in America are faced not with a segregationist conspiracy, were faced with a government conspiracy. Everyone whos filibustering is a senatorthats the government. Everyone whos finagling in Washington, D.C., is a congressmanthats the government. You dont have anybody putting blocks in your path but people who are a part of the government. The same government that you go abroad to fight for and die for is the government that is in a conspiracy to deprive you of your voting rights, deprive you of your economic opportunities, deprive you of decent housing, deprive you of decent education. You dont need to go to the employer alone, it is the government itself, the government of America, that is responsible for the oppression and exploitation and degradation of black people in this country. And you should drop it in their lap. This government has failed the Negro. This so-called democracy has failed the Negro. And all these white liberals have definitely failed the Negro.

So, where do we go from here? First, we need some friends. We need some new allies. The entire civil-rights struggle needs a new interpretation, a broader interpretation. We need to look at this civil-rights thing from another anglefrom the inside as well as from the outside. To those of us whose philosophy is black nationalism, the only way you can get involved in the civil-rights struggle is give it a new interpretation. That old interpretation excluded us. It kept us out. So, were giving a new interpretation to the civil-rights struggle, an interpretation that will enable us to come into it, take part in it. And these handkerchief-heads who have been dillydallying and pussy footing and compromisingwe dont intend to let them pussyfoot and dillydally and compromise any longer.

How can you thank a man for giving you whats already yours? How then can you thank him for giving you only part of whats already yours? You havent even made progress, if whats being given to you, you should have had already. Thats not progress. And I love my Brother Lomax, the way he pointed out were right back where we were in 1954. Were not even as far up as we were in 1954. Were behind where we were in 1954. Theres more segregation now than there was in 1954. Theres more racial animosity, more racial hatred, more racial violence today in 1964, than there was in 1954. Where is the progress?

And now youre facing a situation where the young Negros coming up. They dont want to hear that turn the-other-cheek stuff, no. In Jacksonville, those were teenagers, they were throwing Molotov cocktails. Negroes have never done that before. But it shows you theres a new deal coming in.
Theres new thinking coming in. Theres new strategy coming in. Itll be Molotov cocktails this month, hand grenades next month, and something else next month. Itll be ballots, or itll be bullets. Itll be liberty, or it will be death. The only difference about this kind of deathitll be reciprocal. You know what is meant by reciprocal? Thats one of Brother Lomaxs words. I stole it from him. I dont usually deal with those big words because I dont usually deal with big people. I deal with small people. I find you can get a whole lot of small people and whip hell out of a whole lot of big people. They havent got anything to lose, and theyve got every thing to gain. And theyll let you know in a minute: It takes two to tango; when I go, you go.

The black nationalists, those whose philosophy is black nationalism, in bringing about this new interpretation of the entire meaning of civil rights, look upon it as meaning, as Brother Lomax has pointed out, equality of opportunity. Well, were justified in seeking civil rights, if it means equality of opportunity, because all were doing there is trying to collect for our investment. Our mothers and fathers invested sweat and blood. Three hundred and ten years we worked in this country without a dime in returnI mean without a dime in return. You let the white man walk around here talking about how rich this country is, but you never stop to think how it got rich so quick. It got rich because you made it rich.

You take the people who are in this audience right now. Theyre poor. Were all poor as individuals. Our weekly salary individually amounts to hardly anything. But if you take the salary of everyone in here collectively, itll fill up a whole lot of baskets. Its a lot of wealth. If you can collect the wages of just these people right here for a year, youll be richricher than rich. When you look at it like that, think how rich Uncle Sam had to become, not with this handful, but millions of black people. Your and my mother and father, who didnt work an eight-hour shift, but worked from cant see in the morning until cant see at night, and worked for nothing, making the white man rich, making Uncle Sam rich. This is our investment. This is our contribution, our blood.

Not only did we give of our free labor, we gave of our blood. Every time he had a call to arms, we were the first ones in uniform. We died on every battlefield the white man had. We have made a greater sacrifice than anybody whos standing up in America today. We have made a greater contribution and have collected less. Civil rights, for those of us whose philosophy is black nationalism, means: Give it to us now. Dont wait for next year. Give it to us yesterday, and thats not fast enough.

I might stop right here to point out one thing. Whenever youre going after something that belongs to you, anyone whos depriving you of the right to have it is a criminal. Understand that. Whenever you are going after something that is yours, you are within your legal rights to lay claim to it. And anyone who puts forth any effort to deprive you of that which is yours, is breaking the law, is a criminal. And this was pointed out by the Supreme Court decision. It outlawed segregation.

Which means segregation is against the law. Which means a segregationist is breaking the law. A segregationist is a criminal. You cant label him as anything other than that. And when you demonstrate against segregation, the law is on your side. The Supreme Court is on your side.

Now, who is it that opposes you in carrying out the law? The police department itself. With police dogs and clubs. Whenever you demonstrate against segregation, whether it is segregated education, segregated housing, or anything else, the law is on your side, and anyone who stands in the way is not the law any longer. They are breaking the law; they are not representatives of the law. Any time you demonstrate against segregation and a man has the audacity to put a police dog on you, kill that dog, kill him, Im telling you, kill that dog. I say it if they put me in jail tomorrow, kill that dog. Then youll put a stop to it. Now, if these white people in here dont want to see that kind of action, get down and tell the mayor to tell the police department to pull the dogs in. Thats all you have to do. If you dont do it, someone else will.

If you dont take this kind of stand, your little children will grow up and look at you and think shame. If you dont take an uncompromising stand, I dont mean go out and get violent; but at the same time you should never be nonviolent unless you run into some nonviolence. Im nonviolent with those who are nonviolent with me. But when you drop that violence on me, then youve made me go insane, and Im not responsible for what I do. And thats the way every Negro should get. Any time you know youre within the law, within your legal rights, within your moral rights, in accord with justice, then die for what you believe in. But dont die alone. Let your dying be reciprocal. This is what is meant by equality. Whats good for the goose is good for the gander.

When we begin to get in this area, we need new friends, we need new allies. We need to expand the civil-rights struggle to a higher levelto the level of human rights. Whenever you are in a civil-rights struggle, whether you know it or not, you are confining yourself to the jurisdiction of Uncle Sam. No one from the outside world can speak out in your behalf as long as your struggle is a civil-rights struggle. Civil rights comes within the domestic affairs of this country. All of our African brothers and our Asian brothers and our Latin-American brothers cannot open their mouths and interfere in the domestic affairs of the United States. And as long as its civil rights, this comes under the jurisdiction of Uncle Sam.

But the United Nations has whats known as the charter of human rights; it has a committee that deals in human rights. You may wonder why all of the atrocities that have been committed in Africa and in Hungary and in Asia, and in Latin America are brought before the UN, and the Negro problem is never brought before the UN. This is part of the conspiracy. This old, tricky blue eyed liberal who is supposed to be your and my friend, supposed to be in our corner, supposed to be subsidizing our struggle, and supposed to be acting in the capacity of an adviser, never tells you anything about human rights. They keep you wrapped up in civil rights. And you spend so much time barking up the civil-rights tree, you dont even know theres a human-rights tree on the same floor.

When you expand the civil-rights struggle to the level of human rights, you can then take the case of the black man in this country before the nations in the UN. You can take it before the General Assembly. You can take Uncle Sam before a world court. But the only level you can do it on is the level of human rights. Civil rights keeps you under his restrictions, under his jurisdiction. Civil rights keeps you in his pocket. Civil rights means youre asking Uncle Sam to treat you right. Human rights are something you were born with. Human rights are your God-given rights. Human rights are the rights that are recognized by all nations of this earth. And any time any one violates your human rights, you can take them to the world court.

Uncle Sams hands are dripping with blood, dripping with the blood of the black man in this country. Hes the earths number-one hypocrite. He has the audacityyes, he hasimagine him posing as the leader of the free world. The free world! And you over here singing We Shall Overcome. Expand the civil-rights struggle to the level of human rights. Take it into the United Nations, where our African brothers can throw their weight on our side, where our Asian brothers can throw their weight on our side, where our Latin-American brothers can throw their weight on our side, and where 800 million Chinamen are sitting there waiting to throw their weight on our side.

Let the world know how bloody his hands are. Let the world know the hypocrisy thats practiced over here. Let it be the ballot or the bullet. Let him know that it must be the ballot or the bullet.

When you take your case to Washington, D.C., youre taking it to the criminal whos responsible; its like running from the wolf to the fox. Theyre all in cahoots together. They all work political chicanery and make you look like a chump before the eyes of the world. Here you are walking around in America, getting ready to be drafted and sent abroad, like a tin soldier, and when you get over there, people ask you what are you fighting for, and you have to stick your tongue in your cheek. No, take Uncle Sam to court, take him before the world.


By ballot I only mean freedom. Dont you knowI disagree with Lomax on this issuethat the ballot is more important than the dollar? Can I prove it? Yes. Look in the UN. There are poor nations in the UN; yet those poor nations can get together with their voting power and keep the rich nations from making a move. They have one nationone vote, everyone has an equal vote. And when those brothers from Asia, and Africa and the darker parts of this earth get together, their voting power is sufficient to hold Sam in check. Or Russia in check. Or some other section of the earth in check. So, the ballot is most important.


Right now, in this country, if you and I, 22 million African-Americansthats what we areAfricans who are in America. Youre nothing but Africans. Nothing but Africans. In fact, youd get farther calling yourself African instead of Negro. Africans dont catch hell. Youre the only one catching hell. They dont have to pass civil- rights bills for Africans. An African can go anywhere he wants right now. All youve got to do is tie your head up. Thats right, go anywhere you want. Just stop being a Negro. Change your name to Hoogagagooba. Thatll show you how silly the white man is. Youre dealing with a silly man. A friend of mine whos very dark put a turban on his head and went into a restaurant in Atlanta before they called themselves desegregated. He went into a white restaurant, he sat down, they served him, and he said, What would happen if a Negro came in here? And there hes sitting, black as night, but because he had his head wrapped up the waitress looked back at him and says, Why, there wouldnt no nigger dare come in here.

So, youre dealing with a man whose bias and prejudice are making him lose his mind, his intelligence, every day. Hes frightened. He looks around and sees whats taking place on this earth, and he sees that the pendulum of time is swinging in your direction. The dark people are waking up. Theyre losing their fear of the white man. No place where hes fighting right now is he winning. Everywhere hes fighting, hes fighting someone your and my complexion. And theyre beating him. He cant win any more. Hes won his last battle. He failed to win the Korean War. He couldnt win it. He had to sign a truce. Thats a loss.

Any time Uncle Sam, with all his machinery for warfare, is held to a draw by some rice eaters, hes lost the battle. He had to sign a truce. Americas not supposed to sign a truce. Shes supposed to be bad. But shes not bad any more. Shes bad as long as she can use her hydrogen bomb, but she cant use hers for fear Russia might use hers. Russia cant use hers, for fear that Sam might use his. So, both of them are weapon-less. They cant use the weapon because eachs weapon nullifies the others. So the only place where action can take place is on the ground. And the white man cant win another war fighting on the ground. Those days are over The black man knows it, the brown man knows it, the red man knows it, and the yellow man knows it. So they engage him in guerrilla warfare. Thats not his style. Youve got to have heart to be a guerrilla warrior, and he hasnt got any heart. Im telling you now.

I just want to give you a little briefing on guerrilla warfare because, before you know it, before you know it... It takes heart to be a guerrilla warrior because youre on your own. In conventional warfare you have tanks and a whole lot of other people with you to back you upplanes over your head and all that kind of stuff. But a guerrilla is on his own. All you have is a rifle, some sneakers and a bowl of rice, and thats all you needand a lot of heart. The Japanese on some of those islands in the Pacific, when the American soldiers landed, one Japanese sometimes could hold the whole army off. Hed just wait until the sun went down, and when the sun went down they were all equal. He would take his little blade and slip from bush to bush, and from American to American. The white soldiers couldnt cope with that. Whenever you see a white soldier that fought in the Pacific, he has the shakes, he has a nervous condition, because they scared him to death.
 The same thing happened to the French up in French Indochina. People who just a few years previously were rice farmers got together and ran the heavily-mechanized French army out of Indochina. You dont need itmodern warfare today wont work. This is the day of the guerrilla. They did the same thing in Algeria. Algerians, who were nothing but Bedouins, took a rifle and sneaked off to the hills, and de Gaulle and all of his highfalutin war machinery couldnt defeat those guerrillas. Nowhere on this earth does the white man win in a guerrilla warfare. Its not his speed. Just as guerrilla warfare is prevailing in Asia and in parts of Africa and in parts of Latin America, youve got to be mighty naive, or youve got to play the black man cheap, if you dont think some day hes going to wake up and find that its got to be the ballot or the bullet.

I would like to say, in closing, a few things concerning the Muslim Mosque, Incorporated, which we established recently in New York City. Its true were Muslims and our religion is Islam, but we dont mix our religion with our politics and our economics and our social and civil activitiesnot any more We keep our religion in our mosque. After our religious services are over, then as Muslims we become involved in political action, economic action and social and civic action. We become involved with anybody, any where, any time and in any manner thats designed to eliminate the evils, the political, economic and social evils that are afflicting the people of our community.

The political philosophy of black nationalism means that the black man should control the politics and the politicians in his own community; no more. The black man in the black community has to be re-educated into the science of politics so he will know what politics is supposed to bring him in return. Dont be throwing out any ballots. A ballot is like a bullet. You dont throw your ballots until you see a target, and if that target is not within your reach, keep your ballot in your pocket.

The political philosophy of black nationalism is being taught in the Christian church. Its being taught in the NAACP. Its being taught in CORE meetings. Its being taught in SNCC Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee meetings. Its being taught in Muslim meetings. Its being taught where nothing but atheists and agnostics come together. Its being taught everywhere. Black people are fed up with the dillydallying, pussyfooting, compromising approach that weve been using toward getting our freedom. We want freedom now, but were not going to get it saying We Shall Overcome. Weve got to fight until we overcome.

The economic philosophy of black nationalism is pure and simple. It only means that we should control the economy of our community. Why should white people be running all the stores in our community? Why should white people be running the banks of our community? Why should the economy of our community be in the hands of the white man? Why? If a black man cant move his store into a white community, you tell me why a white man should move his store into a black community. The philosophy of black nationalism involves a re-education program in the black community in regards to economics. Our people have to be made to see that any time you take your dollar out of your community and spend it in a community where you dont live, the community where you live will get poorer and poorer, and the community where you spend your money will get richer and richer. 
Then you wonder why where you live is always a ghetto or a slum area. And where you and I are concerned, not only do we lose it when we spend it out of the community, but the white man has got all our stores in the community tied up; so that though we spend it in the community, at sundown the man who runs the store takes it over across town somewhere. Hes got us in a vise.

So the economic philosophy of black nationalism means in every church, in every civic organization, in every fraternal order, its time now for our people to become conscious of the importance of controlling the economy of our community. If we own the stores, if we operate the businesses, if we try and establish some industry in our own community, then were developing to the position where we are creating employment for our own kind. Once you gain control of the economy of your own community, then you dont have to picket and boycott and beg some cracker downtown for a job in his business.

The social philosophy of black nationalism only means that we have to get together and remove the evils, the vices, alcoholism, drug addiction, and other evils that are destroying the moral fiber of our community. We our selves have to lift the level of our community, the standard of our community to a higher level, make our own society beautiful so that we will be satisfied in our own social circles and wont be running around here trying to knock our way into a social circle where were not wanted. So I say, in spreading a gospel such as black nationalism, it is not designed to make the black man re-evaluate the white manyou know him alreadybut to make the black man re-evaluate himself.

Dont change the white mans mindyou cant change his mind, and that whole thing about appealing to the moral conscience of AmericaAmericas conscience is bankrupt. She lost all conscience a long time ago. Uncle Sam has no conscience.

They dont know what morals are. They dont try and eliminate an evil because its evil, or because its illegal, or because its immoral; they eliminate it only when it threatens their existence. So youre wasting your time appealing to the moral conscience of a bankrupt man like Uncle Sam. If he had a conscience, hed straighten this thing out with no more pressure being put upon him. So it is not necessary to change the white mans mind. We have to change our own mind. You cant change his mind about us. Weve got to change our own minds about each other. We have to see each other with new eyes. We have to see each other as brothers and sisters. We have to come together with warmth so we can develop unity and harmony thats necessary to get this problem solved ourselves. How can we do this? How can we avoid jealousy? How can we avoid the suspicion and the divisions that exist in the community? Ill tell you how.

I have watched how Billy Graham comes into a city, spreading what he calls the gospel of Christ, which is only white nationalism. Thats what he is. Billy Graham is a white nationalist; Im a black nationalist. But since its the natural tendency for leaders to be jealous and look upon a powerful figure like Graham with suspicion and envy, how is it possible for him to come into a city and get all the cooperation of the church leaders? Dont think because theyre church leaders that they dont have weaknesses that make them envious and jealousno, everybodys got it. Its not an accident that when they want to choose a cardinal, as Pope I over there in Rome, they get in a closet so you cant hear them cussing and fighting and carrying on.

Billy Graham comes in preaching the gospel of Christ. He evangelizes the gospel. He stirs everybody up, but he never tries to start a church. If he came in trying to start a church, all the churches would be against him. So, he just comes in talking about Christ and tells everybody who gets Christ to go to any church where Christ is; and in this way the church cooperates with him. So were going to take a page from his book.

Our gospel is black nationalism. Were not trying to threaten the existence of any organization, but were spreading the gospel of black nationalism. Anywhere theres a church that is also preaching and practicing the gospel of black nationalism, join that church. If the NAACP is preaching and practicing the gospel of black nationalism, join the NAACP. If CORE is spreading and practicing the gospel of black nationalism, join CORE. Join any organization that has a gospel thats for the uplift of the black man. And when you get into it and see them pussyfooting or compromising, pull out of it because thats not black nationalism. Well find another one.

And in this manner, the organizations will increase in number and in quantity and in quality, and by August, it is then our intention to have a black nationalist convention which will consist of delegates from all over the country who are interested in the political, economic and social philosophy of black nationalism. After these delegates convene, we will hold a seminar; we will hold discussions; we will listen to everyone. We want to hear new ideas and new solutions and new answers. And at that time, if we see fit then to form a black nationalist party, well form a black nationalist party. If its necessary to form a black nationalist army, well form a black nationalist army. Itll be the ballot or the bullet. Itll be liberty or itll be death.

Its time for you and me to stop sitting in this country, letting some cracker senators, Northern crackers and Southern crackers, sit there in Washington, D.C., and come to a conclusion in their mind that you and I are supposed to have civil rights. Theres no white man going to tell me anything about my rights. Brothers and sisters, always remember, if it doesnt take senators and congressmen and presidential proclamations to give freedom to the white man, it is not necessary for legislation or proclamation or Supreme Court decisions to give freedom to the black man. You let that white man know, if this is a country of freedom, let it be a country of freedom; and if its not a country of freedom, change it.

We will work with anybody, anywhere, at any time, who is genuinely interested in tackling the problem head-on, non-violently as long as the enemy is non-violent, but violent when the enemy gets violent. Well work with you on the voter-registration drive, well work with you on rent strikes, well work with you on school boycotts; I dont believe in any kind of integration; Im not even worried about it, because I know youre not going to get it anyway; youre not going to get it because youre afraid to die; youve got to be ready to die if you try and force yourself on the white man, because hell get just as violent as those crackers in Mississippi, right here in Cleveland. But we will still work with you on the school boycotts because were against a segregated school system. A segregated school system produces children who, when they graduate, graduate with crippled minds. But this does not mean that a school is segregated because its all black. A segregated school means a school that is controlled by people who have no real interest in it whatsoever.

Let me explain what I mean. A segregated district or community is a community in which people live, but outsiders control the politics and the economy of that community. They never refer to the white section as a segregated community. Its the all-Negro section thats a segregated community. Why? The white man controls his own school, his own bank, his own economy, his own politics, his own everything, his own community; but he also controls yours. When youre under someone elses control, youre segregated. Theyll always give you the lowest or the worst that there is to offer, but it doesnt mean youre segregated just because you have your own. Youve got to control your own. Just like the white man has control of his, you need to control yours.

You know the best way to get rid of segregation? The white man is more afraid of separation than he is of integration. Segregation means that he puts you away from him, but not far enough for you to be out of his jurisdiction; separation means youre gone. And the white man will integrate faster than hell let you separate. So we will work with you against the segregated school system because its criminal, because it is absolutely destructive, in every way imaginable, to the minds of the children who have to be exposed to that type of crippling education.

Last but not least, I must say this concerning the great controversy over rifles and shotguns. The only thing that Ive ever said is that in areas where the government has proven itself either unwilling or unable to defend the lives and the property of Negroes, its time for Negroes to defend themselves. Article number two of the constitutional amendments provides you and me the right to own a rifle or a shotgun. It is constitutionally legal to own a shotgun or a rifle. This doesnt mean youre going to get a rifle and form battalions and go out looking for white folks, although youd be within your rightsI mean, youd be justified; but that would be illegal and we dont do anything illegal. If the white man doesnt want the black man buying rifles and shotguns, then let the government do its job. Thats all. And dont let the white man come to you and ask you what you think about what Malcolm sayswhy, you old Uncle Tom. He would never ask you if he thought you were going to say, Amen! No, he is making a Tom out of you. So, this doesnt mean forming rifle clubs and going out looking for people, but it is time, in 1964, if you are a man, to let that man know.

If hes not going to do his job in running the government and providing you and me with the protection that our taxes are supposed to be for, since he spends all those billions for his defense budget, he certainly cant begrudge you and me spending $12 or $15 for a single-shot, or double-action. I hope you understand. Dont go out shooting people, but any timebrothers and sisters, and especially the men in this audience; some of you wearing Congressional Medals of Honor, with shoulders this wide, chests this big, muscles that bigany time you and I sit around and read where they bomb a church and murder in cold blood, not some grownups, but four little girls while they were praying to the same God the white man taught them to pray to, and you and I see the government go down and cant find who did it.

Why, this manhe can find Eichmann hiding down in Argentina somewhere. Let two or three American soldiers, who are minding somebody elses business way over in South Vietnam, get killed, and hell send battleships, sticking his nose in their business. He wanted to send troops down to Cuba and make them have what he calls free electionsthis old cracker who doesnt have free elections in his own country.

No, if you never see me another time in your life, if I die in the morning, Ill die saying one thing: the ballot or the bullet, the ballot or the bullet.

If a Negro in 1964 has to sit around and wait for some cracker senator to filibuster when it comes to the rights of black people, why, you and I should hang our heads in shame. You talk about a march on Washington in 1963, you havent seen anything. Theres some more going down in 64.

And this time theyre not going like they went last year. Theyre not going singing We Shall Overcome. Theyre not going with white friends. Theyre not going with placards already painted for them. Theyre not going with round-trip tickets. Theyre going with one way tickets. And if they dont want that non-nonviolent army going down there, tell them to bring the filibuster to a halt.

The black nationalists arent going to wait. Lyndon B. Johnson is the head of the Democratic Party. If hes for civil rights, let him go into the Senate next week and declare himself. Let him go in there right now and declare himself. Let him go in there and denounce the Southern branch of his party. Let him go in there right now and take a moral standright now, not later. Tell him dont wait until election time. If he waits too long, brothers and sisters, he will be responsible for letting a condition develop in this country which will create a climate that will bring seeds up out of the ground with vegetation on the end of them looking like something these people never dreamed of. In 1964, its the ballot or the bullet. Thank you.

The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that as it was the evil sin of slavery that caused the downfall and destruction of ancient Egypt and Babylon, and of ancient Greece, as well as ancient Rome, so it was the evil sin of colonialism (slavery, nineteenth-century European style) that caused the collapse of the white nations in present-day Europe as world powers. Unbiased scholars and unbiased observers agree that the wealth and power of white Europe has rapidly declined during the nineteen-year period between World War II and today.

So we of this present generation are also witnessing how the enslavement of millions of black people in this country is now bringing White America to her hour of judgment, to her downfall as a respected nation. And even those Americans who are blinded by childlike patriotism can see that it is only a matter of time before White America too will be utterly destroyed by her own sins, and all traces of her former glory will be removed from this planet forever.

The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that as it was divine will in the case of the destruction of the slave empires of the ancient and modern past, America's judgement and destruction will also be brought about by divine will and divine power. Just as ancient nations paid for their sins against humanity, White America must now pay for her sins against twenty-two million "Negroes." White America's worst crimes her hypocrisy and her deceit. White America pretends to ask herself: "What do these Negroes want?" White America knows that four hundred years of cruel bondage has made these twenty-two million ex-slaves too (mentally) blind to see what they really want.

White America should be asking herself: "What does God want for these twenty-two million ex-slaves?" Who will make White America know what God wants? Who will present God's plan to White America? What is God's solution to the problem caused by the presence of twenty-two million unwanted slaves here in America? And who will present God's solution?

We, the Muslims who follow the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, believe whole-heartedly in the God of justice. We believe in the Creator, whose divine power and laws of justice created and sustain the universe. We believe in the all-wise Supreme Being: the great God who is called "Jehovah" by the monotheistic Hebrews. We do not believe in the Trinity (or "plurality of gods") as advocated by the Polytheistic Christians. We who are Muslims call God by his true name: Allah, the great God of the Universe, the Lord of all the worlds, the Master of the Day of Judgement. The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that Allah is the true name of the divine Supreme Being, and that Islam is an Arabic word which means complete submission to God's will, or obedience to God's guidance.

We who are Muslims believe in this religion that is described in the Arabic language by the word "Islam." This religion, Islam, teaches us submission to God's will and obedience to God's guidance. It gives us the moral discipline that makes it easy for us to walk the path of truth and righteousness. "Muslim" is an Arabic word, and it describes a person whose religion is Islam. A Muslim is one who practices complete submission and obedience to God's will. Here in America the word "Muslim" is westernized or anglicized and pronounced "Moslem." Muslim and Moslem are actually the same word. The true believers in Allah call themselves Muslims, but the non-believing infidels refer to Muslims as Moslems or Muhammadans.

Many of the weak, backsliding Muslims who come to this country have also adopted some of these same pronunciations coined for them by the infidels. But we don't condemn these "orthodox" Muslims, because the reward of the believer, as well as the chastisement of the nonbeliever and the backslider, comes only from Allah. Allah is the only judge. He alone is master of this Day of Judgment in which we now live.

Why is the American white man so set against the twenty-two million "Negroes" learning about the religion of Islam? Islam is the religion that elevates the morals of the people who want to do right. Just by teaching us the religion of Islam, and by showing us how to live the life of a Muslim, the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is turning hundreds of thousands of Americans "Negroes" away from drunkenness, drug addiction, nicotine, stealing, lying, cheating, gambling, profanity, filth, fornication, adultery, and the many other acts of immorality that are almost inseparable from this indecent Western society. The Honorable Elijah Muhammad has restored our cultural roots, our racial identity, our racial pride, and our racial confidence. He has given us the incentive and energy to stand on our own feet and walk for ourselves.

Just as we believe in one God, whose proper name is Allah, we believe also that this one God has only one religion, the religion of Islam. We believe that we are living in the time of "prophecy fulfillment," the time predicted by the ancient prophets of God, when this one God would use his one religion to establish one world here on earththe world of Islam, or Muslim worldwhich only means: a world of universal brotherhood that will be based upon the principles of truth, freedom, justice, equality, righteousness, and peace.

But before God can set up his new world, the Muslim world, or world of Islam, which will be established on the principles to truth, peace, and brotherhood, God himself must first destroy this evil Western world, the white world...a wicked world, ruled by a race of devils, that preaches falsehood, practices slavery, and thrives on indecency and immorality. You and I are living in that great Doomsday, the final hour, when the ancient prophets predicted that God himself would appear in person, in the flesh, and with divine power He would bring about the judgement and destruction of this present evil world. The hour of judgement and doom is upon White America for the evil seeds of slavery and hypocrisy she has sown; and God himself has declared that no one shall escape the doom of this Western world, except those who accept Allah as God, Islam as his only religion, and the Honorable Elijah Muhammad as his Messenger to the twenty-two million ex-slaves here in America, twenty-two million "Negroes" who are referred to in the symbolism of the Scriptures as the Lost Sheep, the Lost Tribes, or the Lost People of God.

White America is doomed! God has declared that the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is your only means of escape. When you reject the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, when you refuse to hear his message or heed his warning you are closing your only door of escape. When you cut yourself off from him, you cut yourself off from your only way out of the divine disaster that is fast approaching White America.

Before your pride causes you to harden your heart and further close your ears, and before your ignorance provokes laughter, search the Christian Scriptures. Search even the histories of other nations that sat in the same positions of wealth, power, and authority that these white Americans now hold...and see what God did to them. If God's unchanging laws of justice caught up with every one of the slave empires of the past, how dare you think White America can escape the harvest of unjust seeds planted by her white forefathers against our black forefathers here in the land of slavery!

According to the Scriptures, when God was going to destroy the wicked world with the flood, He first raised up a man named Noah, and missioned him as a warner to warn the wicked world that the flood was coming, and that he, Noah, was their only way out. But their own wickedness and lust for evil made them too blind to see Noah, and they were thus destroyed by the flood of their own evil deeds. Again, when God prepared to destroy the wicked world of the Sodomites with the fire of his wrath, He first raised up a man Lot, and missioned him to warn the Sodomites of the fire that was coming to destroy them because of their evil deeds, and to let them know that Lot was their only way out. But the Sodomites' addiction to their own lowly passions also made them too blind to see the divinity of Lot's mission and too deaf to heed his warning. They inherited the sea of fire and brimstone as reward for their rejection of God's servant.

Still later. when God prepared to turn his wrath upon the Egyptians, that House of Bondage, or Land of Slavery, God raised his servant Moses as a warner to the cruel slave master, Pharaoh. Moses' message to the slave master was simple and clear: "Let my people go. Let them no longer be segregated by you; stop trying to deceive them with false promises of integration with you; let them separate themselves from you. Let them go with me to a place wherein the God of our forefathers has prepared a land for us...a land in which we can serve our own God, practice righteousness, and live in peace among our own kind." And Moses warned Pharaoh: "If you will not let them separate from you and go with me, then our God will destroy you and your entire slave empire from the face of this earth." Pharaoh's wealth and power made him too proud to listen to the little inarticulate ex-slave named Moses. He ridiculed Moses' lack of eloquence. White America's attitude today is the same toward the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. They ridicule him because of his lack of education and his cotton-field origin in Georgia. White America chooses to listen to the Negro civil rights leaders, the Big Six. Six puppets who have been trained by the whites in white institutions and then placed over our people by these same whites as "spokesmen" for our people. These handpicked "spokesmen" do nothing but parrot for the whites exactly what they know the whites want to hear.

Pharaoh used this same strategy to oppose Moses. Pharaoh also set up puppet-magicians to parrot his lies and to deceive the Hebrew slaves into thinking that Moses was a hate-teacher, an extremist, who was advocating violence and racial supremacy simply because Moses was trying to restore unto his people their own lost culture, their lost identity, their lost racial dignity...the same as the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is trying to do among the twenty-two million "Negro" slaves here in this modern House of Bondage today. By opposing Moses, Pharaoh was actually opposing Moses' God; thus that same God (Jehovah) was forced to drown Pharaoh in the Red Sea, destroy his slave empire, and remove the Egyptian influence from the face of this earth.

History is repeating itself today. America faces the same fate at the hands of Almighty God. That same divine handwriting is now on the walls of this modern American House of Bondage. We, the Muslims who follow the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, believe that the symbolic stories in these ancient Scriptures paint a prophetic picture of today, of America, and of the twenty-two million "Negroes" herein America....We believe that our present generation is witnessing the fulfillment of these divine prophecies, through the work being done among our people here in America today by the Honorable Elijah Muhammad.

This little, meek, humble, inarticulate ex-slave is a modern Noah, a modern Lot, a modern Moses...a modern Daniel. In fact, he is a modern David, and like ancient David the Honorable Elijah Muhammad has refused the carnal weapons of this wicked world and, armed only with a "slingshot" and "stones of truth," this modern David is battering the head of this modern Goliath (giant America), with a doctrine that no "helmet of falsehood" or "shield of deceit" can withstand...and it is only a matter time, before the Honorable Elijah Muhammad's gospel of truth will make this American "giant of falsehood" topple and fall for ever.

The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us to believe in all of the prophets (including prophet Jesus), all of the Scriptures, the resurrection of the dead (not the resurrection of the physical dead, but the resurrection of the mentally dead American Negroes); also Judgment Day and Doomsday (which only means: the judgment of this wicked world and its destruction by God himself).

The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us belief but also the principles of Muslim practice:

1) We practice prayer toward the Holy City of Mecca five times daily.

2) We make charitable contributions toward the spread of Islam, or to spread this divine truth that will save our people from the destruction of this wicked Western world.

3) We practice fasting (we eat only one meal every twenty-four hours, and we abstain from all food for three days out of every month of the year...and we fast also during the holy month of Ramadan.)

4) Those of us who can afford it strive to make the pilgrimage to the Holy City, Mecca, at least once during out lifetime. The Honorable Elijah Muhammad and two of his sons made this trip in December of 1959, and others of his followers have been making it since then.

The Honorable Elijah Muhammad's mission as messenger is to remind America that God has not forgotten America's crimes against his long-lost people, who have spent four hundred miserable years in this land of bondage. His mission is to warn America of the divine destruction that twill soon rain down upon her from the very skies above her. His mission is to warn America to repent, and to atone for her sins against God's people...or face complete destruction and permanent removal from the face of this earth...and removal not only as a nation but removal even as a race! The Honorable Elijah Muhammad's divine mission, his message, and his work here in America is the same as that of Noah, Lot, Moses, and Daniel. He is a warner to our white oppressor, but a savior to the oppressed. He is preaching the divine execution of the wicked slave master (whom God can justifiably hold responsible for all sins); but he preaches forgiveness and salvation for the Negro ex-slaves, who have been made so deaf, dumb, and mentally blind by the slave master that no just God could now condemn these American Negroes for their sinful, ignorant behavior.

When the Honorable Elijah Muhammad says "end of the world," he does not mean the end of the earth; he is referring to the end of a race of "world of people," and their removal from this earth: the removal of their world. There are many "worlds" here on this earth: the Buddhist world, Hindu world, Jewish world, Christian world, Capitalist world, Communist world, Socialist world, Eastern world and Western world -- Oriental world and Occidental world -- dark world and white world. Which of these many worlds has come to the end of its rope, the end of its time? Look around you at all of the signs and you will agree that it is the end of time for the Western world, the European world, the Christian world, the white world.

The time is past when the white world can exercise unilateral authority and control over the dark world. The independence and power of the dark world is on the increase; the dark world is rising in wealth, power, prestige, and influence. It is the rise of he dark world that is causing the fall of the white world. As the white man loses his power to oppress and exploit the dark world, the white man's own wealth (power or "world") decreases. His world is on its way down; it is on its way out...and it is the will and power of God himself that is bringing an end to the white world.

You and I were born at this turning point on history; we are witnessing the fulfillment of prophecy. Our present generation is witnessing the end of colonialism, Europeanism, Westernism, or "White-ism"...the end of white supremacy, the end of the evil white man's unjust rule. I must repeat: The end of the world only means the end of a certain "power." The end of colonialism ends the world (or power) of the colonizer. The end of Europeanism ends the world (or power) of the European...and the end of "White-ism" ends the world (or power) of the white man.

According to the Christian Bible, Judgment Day is that final hour when God will cause "those who led others into captivity to go into captivity themselves"...and "those who killed others with the sword to be killed by the sword of justice themselves." Justice only means that the wicked slave master must reap the fruit (or harvest) of the evil seeds of slavery he has planted. This is justice! Other slave empires received justice, and now White America must receive justice. According to White America's own evil past, which is clearly recorded on the pages of history, so shall God judge her today.

Before God can bring about this divine destruction, He must first separate the innocent from the guilty, the righteous from the wicked, the oppressed from the oppressor, the exploited from the exploiter, the slaves from the slave master. God never integrates his people with those who are not his people. The Scripture says God will separate his (black) sheep from the (white) goats, and the wheat from the tare. The goats are to be slaughtered and the tare cast to the burning flame...while the sheep are to be gathered into his pasture and the wheat into his barn.

In like manner God has prepared a Doomsday (a day of slaughter, a lake of fire) for this sinful white world of colonizers, enslavers, oppressors, exploiters, lynchers...and all others who refuse to repent and atone at the end of this white world. God has also prepared a refuge, a haven of salvation, for those who will accept his last Messenger and heed his last warning.

White America is doomed! Death and devastating destruction hang at this very moment in the skies over America. But why must her divine execution take place? Is it too late for her to avoid this catastrophe?

All the prophets of the past listed America as number one among the guilty that would be too proud, and too blind, to repent and atone when God's last Messenger is raised in her midst to warn her. America's last chance, her last warning, is coming from the lips of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad today. Accept him and be saved; reject him and be damned! It is written that White America will reject him; it is also written that White America will be damned and doomed... and the prophets who make these prophecies are never wrong in their divine predictions.

White America refuses to study, reflect, and learn a lesson from history; ancient Egypt didn't have to be destroyed. It was her corrupt government, the crooked politicians, who caused her destruction. Pharaoh hired Hebrew magicians to try and fool their own people into thinking they would soon be integrated into the mainstream of that country's life. Pharaoh didn't want the Hebrews to listen to Moses' message of separation. Even in that day separation was God's solution to the "slave's problem." By opposing Moses, the magicians were actually choosing sides against the God of their own people.

In like manner, modern Negro magicians are hired by the American government to oppose the Honorable Elijah Muhammad today. They pose as Negro "leaders." They have been hired by this white government (white so-called liberals) to make our people her think that integration into this doomed white society will soon solve our problem.

The Honorable Elijah Muhammad warns us daily: The only permanent solution to America's race problem is the complete separation of these twenty-two million ex-slaves from our white slave master, and the return of these ex-slaves to our own land, where we can then live in peace and security among our people. The Honorable Elijah Muhammad warns us daily: The American government is trying to trick her twenty-two million ex-slaves with promises that she never intends to keep. the crooked politicians in the government are working with the Negro civil rights leaders, but not to solve the race problem. The greedy politicians who run this government give lip-service to the civil rights struggle only to further their own selfish interests. And their main interest as politicians is to stay in power.

In this deceitful American game of power politics, the Negroes (i.e., the race problem, the integration and civil rights issues) are nothing but tools, used by one group of whites called Liberals against another group of whites called Conservatives, either to get into power or to remain in power. Among whites here in America, the political teams are no longer divided into Democrats and Republicans. The whites who are now struggling for control of the American political throne are divided into "liberal" and "conservative" camps. The white liberals from both parties cross party lines to work together toward the same goal, and white conservatives from both parties do likewise.

The white liberal differs from the white conservative only in one way: the liberal is more deceitful than the conservative. The liberal is more hypocritical than the conservative. Both want power, but the white liberal is the one who has perfected the art of posing as the Negro's friend and benefactor; and by winning the friendship, allegiance, and support of the Negro, the white liberal is able to use the Negro as a pawn or tool in this political "football game" that is constantly raging between the white liberals and white conservatives.

Politically the American Negro is nothing but a football and the white liberals control this mentally dead ball through tricks of tokenism: false promises of integration and civil rights. In this profitable game of deceiving and exploiting the political politician of the American Negro, those white liberals have the willing cooperation of the Negro civil rights leaders. These "leaders" sell out our people for just a few crumbs of token recognition and token gains. These "leaders" are satisfied with token victories and token progress because they themselves are nothing but token leaders.

According to a New York Herald-Tribune editorial dated February 5, 1960, out of eleven million qualified Negro voters, only 2,700,000 actually took time to vote. This means that, roughly speaking, only three million of the eleven million Negroes who are qualified to vote actually take an active part. The remaining eight million remain voluntarily inactive...and yet this smallthree millionminority of Negro voters hold the decisive edge in determining who will be the next President.

If who will be the next President is influenced by only three million Negro voters, it is easy to understand why the presidential candidates of both political parties put on such a false show with the Civil Rights Bill and with false promises of integration. They must impress the three million voting Negroes who are the actual "integration seekers." If such a fuss is made over these three million "integration seekers," what would presidential candidates have to do to appease the eight million non-voting Negroes, if they ever decide to become politically active? Who are the eight million non-voting Negroes; what do they want, and why don't they vote?

The three million Negro voters are the so-called middle-class Negroes, referred to by the late Howard University sociologist, E. Franklin Frazier, as the "black bourgeoisie," who have been educated to think as patriotic "individualists," with no racial pride, and who therefore look forward hopefully to the future "integrated-intermarried" society promised them by the white liberals and the Negro "leaders." It is with this hope that the "integration-minded" three million remain an active part of the white-controlled political parties. But it must never be overlooked that these three million "integration seekers" are only a small minority of the eleven million potential Negro voters.

The eight million non-voting Negroes are in the majority; they are the downtrodden black masses. The black masses have refused to vote, or to take part in politics, because they reject the Uncle Tom approach of the Negro leadership that has been handpicked for them by the white man. These Uncle Tom leaders do not speak for the Negro majority; they don't speak for the black masses. They speak for the "black bourgeoisie," the brainwashed, white-minded, middle-class minority who are ashamed of being black, and don't want to be identified with the black masses, and are therefore seeking to lose their "black identity" by mixing, mingling, intermarrying, and integrating with the white man.

The race problem can never be solved by listening to this white-minded minority. The white man should try to learn what the black masses want, and the only way to learn what the black masses wants is by listening to the man who speaks for the black masses of America. The one man here in America who speaks for the downtrodden, dissatisfied black masses is this same man so many of our people are flocking to see and hear. This same Mr. Muhammad who is labeled by the white man as a black supremacist and as a racist.

If the three million white-minded Negroes are casting their ballots for integration and intermarriage, what do the nonvoting black masses want? Find out what the black masses want, and then perhaps America's grave race problem can be solved.

Think how the late President himself got into office by only scant margin which was "donated" to him by Negro voters, and think how many governors and other white politicians hold their seats (some by less than five thousand votes). Only then can you understand the importance of these white liberals place on their control of the Negro vote! The white liberals hate the Honorable Elijah Muhammad because they know their present position in the power structure stems form their ability to deceive and to exploit the Negro, politically as well as economically.

They know that the Honorable Elijah Muhammad's divine message will make our people (1) wake up, (2) clean up, and (3) stand up. They know that once the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is able to resurrect the Negro from this mental grave of ignorance, by teaching him the truth about himself and his real enemy, the Negro will then be able to see and think for himself. Once the Negro learns to think for himself, he will no longer allow the white liberal to use him as a helpless football in the white man's crooked game of "power politics."

Let us examine briefly some of the tricky strategy used by white liberals to harness and exploit the political energies of the Negro. The crooked politicians in Washington, D.C., purposely make a big noise over the proposed civil rights legislation. By blowing up the civil rights issue they skillfully add false importance to the Negro civil rights "leaders." Once the image of these Negro civil rights "leaders" has been blown up way beyond its proper proportion, these same Negro civil rights "leaders" are then used by white liberals to influence and control the Negro voters, all for the benefit of the white politicians who pose as liberals, who pose as friends of the Negro.

The white conservatives aren't friends of the Negro either, but they at least don't try to hide it. They are like wolves; they show their teeth in a snarl that keeps the Negro always aware of where he stands with them. But the white liberals are foxes, who also show their teeth to the Negro but pretend that they are smiling. The white liberals are more dangerous than the conservatives; they lure the Negro, and as the Negro runs from the growling wolf, he flees into the open jaws of the "smiling" fox. The job of the Negro civil rights leader is to make the Negro forget that the wolf and the fox both belong to the (same) family. Both are canines; and no matter which one of them the Negro places his trust in, he never ends up in the White House, but always in the dog house.

The white liberals control the Negro and the Negro vote by controlling the Negro civil rights leaders. As long as they control the Negro civil rights leaders, they can also control and contain the Negro's struggle, and they can control the Negro's so-called revolt. The Negro "revolution" is controlled by these foxy white liberals, by the government itself. But the black revolution is controlled only by God.

The black revolution is the struggle of the nonwhites of this earth against their white oppressors. The black revolution has swept white supremacy out of Africa, out of Asia, and is getting ready to sweep it out of Latin America. Revolutions are based upon land. Revolutionaries are the landless against the landlord. Revolutions are never peaceful, never loving, never nonviolent. Nor are they ever compromising. Revolutions are destructive and bloody. Revolutionaries don't compromise with the enemy; they don't even negotiate. Like the flood in Noah's day, revolution drowns all opposition, or like the fire in Lot's day, the black revolution burns everything that gets in its path.

America is the last stronghold of white supremacy. The black revolution, which is international in nature and scope. is sweeping down upon America like a raging forest fire. It is only a matter of time before America herself will be engulfed by the black flames, these black fire brands. Whenever an uncontrollable forest fire is roaring down upon the farmhouse, the only way the farmer can fight that forest fire is by building a "backfire," a smaller fire that he himself can control. He then uses this "controlled fire" to fight the fire that is raging beyond his control.

Here in America, the black revolution, the "uncontrollable forest fire," is personified in the religious teachings, and the religious works, of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. This great man of God cannot in any way be controlled by the white man, and he will not compromise in any way with the wrongs this government has inflicted upon our people.

The Negro "revolt" is controlled by the white man, the white fox. The Negro "revolution" is controlled by this white government. The leaders of the Negro "revolution", the civil rights leaders, are all subsidized, influenced and controlled by the white liberals; and all of the demonstrations that are taking place on this country to desegregate lunch counters, theaters, public toilets, etc., are just artificial fires that have been ignited and fanned by the white liberals in the desperate hope that they can use this artificial revolution to fight off the real black revolution that has already swept white supremacy out of Africa, Asia, and is sweeping it out of Latin America...and is even now manifesting itself also right here among the black masses in this country.

Can we prove that the Negro revolution is controlled by white liberals? Certainly!

Right after the Birmingham demonstrations, when the entire world had seen on television screens the police dogs, police clubs, and fire hoses brutalizing defenseless black women, children, and even babies, it was reported on page twenty-six in the May 15 issue of The New York Times, that the late President Kennedy and his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, during a luncheon conference with several newspaper editors from the State of Alabama, had warned these editors that they must give at least some token gains to the moderate Negro leaders in order to enhance the image of these moderate Negro leaders in the eyesight of the black masses; otherwise the masses of Negroes might turn in the direction of Negro extremists. And the late President named the Black Muslims as being foremost among the Negro extremist groups that he did not want Negroes to turn toward.

In essence, the late President told these southern editors that he was trying to build up the weak image of the Negro civil rights leaders, in order to offset the strong religious image of the Muslim leader, the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. He wasn't giving these Negro leaders anything they deserved; but he was confessing the necessity of building them up, and propping them up, in order to hold the black masses in check, keep them in his grasp, and under his control. The late President knew that once Negroes hear the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, the white liberals will never influence or control or misuse those Negroes for the benefit of the white liberals any more. So the late President was faced with a desperate situation.

Martin Luther King's image had been shattered the previous year when he failed to bring about desegregation in Albany, Georgia. The other civil rights leaders had also become fallen idols. The black masses across the country at the grass roots level had already begun to take their cases to the streets on their own. The government in Washington knew that something had to be done to get the rampaging Negroes back into the corral, back under the control of the white liberals.

The government propaganda machine began encouraging Negroes to follow only what it called "responsible" Negro leaders. The government actually meant Negro leaders who were responsible to the government, and who could therefore by controlled by the government, and be used by that same government to control their impatient people. The government knows that the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is responsible only to God and can be controlled only by God. But this white government of America doesn't believe in God!

Let us review briefly what happened last spring: In May in Birmingham, Negroes erupted and retaliated against the whites. During the many long weeks when the police dogs and police clubs and the high-pressure water hoses were brutalizing black women and children and babies, and the Birmingham Negroes had called for the government to intervene with Federal troops, the late President did nothing but sit on his hands. He said there was nothing he could do. But when Negroes in Birmingham exploded and began to defend themselves, the late President then sent in Federal troops, not to defend the Negroes, but to defend the whites against whom the Negroes had finally retaliated.

At this point, spontaneous demonstrations began taking place all over the country. At the grass roots level Negroes began to talk about marching on Washington, tying up the Congress, the Senate, the White House, and even the airport. They threatened to bring this government to a halt. This frightened the entire white power structure. The late President called in the Negro civil rights leaders and told them to bring this "march" to a halt. The Negro civil rights leaders were forced to tell the late President that they couldn't stop the march because they hadn't started it. It was spontaneous, at the grass roots level across the country, and it had no leadership whatsoever. When the late President saw that he couldn't stop the march, he joined; he endorsed it; he welcomed it; he became a part of it; and it was he who put the six Negro civil rights leaders at the head of it. It was he who made them the Big Six.

How did he do it? How did he gain control of the March on Washington? A study of his shrewd strategy will give you a glimpse of the political genius with which the Kennedy family was ruling this country from the White House, and how they used the America Negro in all of their schemes. The late President endorsed the march; that should have been the tip-off. A few days later in New York City, at the Carlyle Hotel, a philanthropic society known as the Taconic Foundation, headed by a shrewd white liberal named Stephen Currier, called a meeting of the six civil rights leaders in an effort to bring unity of action and purpose among all the civil rights groups.

After Martin Luther King had been released from his Birmingham jail cell in May, he traveled from coast to coast in a fund-raising campaign for his Southern Christian Leadership Conference. Roy Wilkins then began to attack King, accusing him of stirring up trouble, saying that after the NAACP would bail out King and the other demonstrators, then King would capitalize on the trouble by taking up all the money for his own organization, leaving the NAACP to hold the bag at a great financial loss.

As King, Wilkins, and the other civil rights leaders began to fight publicly among themselves over the money they were trying to get from the white liberals, they were destroying their own leadership "image."

The white liberal, Stephen Currier, showed them how they were destroying themselves by attacks upon each other, and it was suggested that, since most of their divisions and disagreements stemmed from competition for funds from white liberals, they should unite their fund raising efforts. Then they formed the Council for the United Civil Rights Leadership, under the pretext that it would be for fund-raising purposes. They chose the Urban League's Whitney Young as the chairman, and the white liberal Stephen Currier became the co-chairman.

It took the white man to bring those Negro leaders together and to unite them into one group. He let them select their own chairman, but he himself became the co-chairman. This shrewd maneuver placed the white liberal and the Taconic Foundation in the position to exercise influence and control over the six civil rights leaders and, by working through them, to control the entire civil rights movement, including the March on Washington. (It also put the white liberals in a position to force the Big Six to come out against the recently proposed Christmas boycott by threatening to withdraw their financial support from the civil rights drive.)

According to the August 4 edition of The New York Times, $800,000 was split up between these six Negro civil rights leaders on June 19 at the Carlyle Hotel, and another $700,000 was promised to be given to them at a later date after the march was over, if everything went well with the march.
Public relations experts were made available to these "Six Big Negroes," and they were given access to the news media throughout the country. The press skillfully projected them as the leaders of the March on Washington, and as soon as the Big Six were looked upon in the public eye as the organizers of the march, and their first step was to invite four white "leaders" to become a part of the march "godhead." This group of leaders would supposedly okay all the plans and thereby control the "direction and the mood" of the march.

These four white "leaders" represented the same factions that had put the late President in the White House: Catholics, Jews, Labor, and Protestant liberals. When the late President had learned that he couldn't stop the march, he not only joined it himself but he encouraged all of his political bedfellows to join it. This is the way the white liberals took over the March on Washington, weakened its impact, and changed its course; by changing the participants and the contents, they were able to change the very nature of the march itself.

Example: If I have a cup of coffee that is too strong for me because it is too black, I weaken it by pouring cream into it, I integrate it with cream. If I keep pouring enough cream in the coffee, pretty soon the entire flavor of he coffee is changed; the very nature of the coffee is changed. If enough cream is poured in, eventually you don't even know that I had coffee in this cup. This is what Happened with the March on Washington. The whites didn't integrate it; they infiltrated it. Whites joined it; they engulfed it; they became so much a part of it, it lost its original flavor. It ceased to be a black march; it ceased to be militant; it ceased to be angry; it ceased to be impatient. In fact, it ceased to be a march. It became a picnic, an outing with a festive, circus-like atmosphere...clowns and all.

The government had learned that in cases where the demonstrators are predominantly black, they are extremely militant, and ofttimes very violent. But to the same degree that whites participate, violence most times is decreased. The government knew that in cases wherein blacks were demonstrating all by themselves, those blacks are so dissatisfied, disenchanted, and angry at the white man that they will ofttimes strike back violently regardless of the odds or the consequences. The white government had learned that the only way to hold these black people in check is by joining them, by infiltrating their ranks disguised as integrationist; by integrating their marches and all their demonstrations, and weakening them: in this way only could they be held in check.

The government told the marchers what time to arrive in Washington, where to arrive, and how to arrive. The government then channeled them from the arrival point to the feet of a dead President, George Washington, and then let them march from there to the feet of another dead President, Abraham Lincoln.

The original black militants had planned to march on the White House, the Senate, and the Congress and to bring all political traffic on Capitol Hill to a halt, but the shrewd politicians in Washington, realizing that those original black militants could not be stopped, joined them. By joining the marchers, the white liberals were able to lead the marchers away from the White House, the Senate, the Congress, Capitol Hill, and away from victory. By keeping them marching from the Washington Monument to the Lincoln Monument, marching between the feet of two dead Presidents, they never reached the White House to see the then living President.

The entire march was controlled by the late president. The government in Washington had told the marchers what signs to carry, what songs to sing, what speeches to make, and what speeches not to make, and then told the marchers to be sure to get out of town by sundown.

One of the Big Six leaders, John Lewis, chairman of the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee, was prevented from making a very militant speech. He wanted to attack the Kennedy administration for its hypocrisy on civil rights. The speech was censored by the Rt. Rev. Patrick O'Boyle, the Catholic Archbishop of Washington, D.C.. This was a case in which the Catholic Church itself, for whom Rev. O'Boyle speaks, put itself in the position of censoring the legitimate opinion of one of the Big Six Negro civil rights leaders.

The late President's shrewd strategy was: If you can't beat them, join them. The Catholic President placed his Catholic bishop in a strategic position to exercise censorship over any one of the Big Six Negro leaders who tried to deviate from the script in this great "extravaganza" called the March on Washington, which the government had controlled right from the very beginning.

So, in the final analysis of the march: It would have to be classified as the best performance of the year; in fact it was the greatest performance of this century. It topped anything that Hollywood could have produced. If we were going to give out Academy Awards in 1963, we would have to give the late President an Oscar for the "Best Producer of the Year"; and to the four white liberals who participated should get an Oscar as the "Best Actors of the Year," because they really acted like sincere liberals and fooled many Negroes. And to the six Negro civil rights leaders should go and Oscar for the "Best Supporting Cast," because they supported the late President in his entire act, and in his entire program.

Now that the show is over, the black masses are still without land, without jobs, and without homes...their Christian churches are still being bombed, their innocent little girls murdered. So what did the March on Washington accomplish? Nothing!

The late President has a bigger image as a liberal, the other whites who participated have bigger liberal images also, and the Negro civil rights leaders have now been permanently named the Big Six (because of their participation in the Big Fix?)...but the black masses are still unemployed, still starving, and still living in the slums...and, I might add, getting angrier and more explosive every day.

History must repeat itself! Because of America's evil deeds against these twenty-two million "Negroes," like Egypt and Babylon before her, America herself now stands before the "bar of justice." White America is now facing her Day of Judgment, and she can't escape because today God himself is the judge. God himself is now the administrator of justice, and God himself is to be her divine executor!

Is it possible for America to escape this divine disaster? If America can't atone for the crimes she has committed against the twenty-two million "Negroes," if she can't undo the evils she has brutally and mercilessly heaped upon our people these past four hundred years, then America has signed her own doom...and our own people would be foolish to accept her deceitful offers of integration into her doomed society at this late date!

How can America atone for her crimes? The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that a desegregated theater or lunch counter won't solve our problems. Better jobs won't even solve our problems. An integrated cup of coffee isn't sufficient pay for four hundred years of slave labor, and a better job in the white man's factory or position in his business is, at best, only a temporary solution. The only lasting or permanent solution is complete separation on some land that we can call our own.

The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that the race problem can easily be solved, just by sending these twenty-two million ex-slaves back to our own homeland where we can live in peace and harmony with our own kind. But this government should provide the transportation, plus everything else we need to get started again in our own country. This government should provide everything we need in machinery, materials, and finance; enough to last us for from twenty to twenty-five years, until we can become an independent people in our own country.

If this white government is afraid to let her twenty-two million ex-slaves go back to our country and to our own people, then America must set aside some separate territory here in the Western Hemisphere, where the two races can live apart from each ot her, since we certainly don't get along peacefully while we are here together. The size of the territory can be judged according to our own population. If our people number one-seventh of America's total population, then give us one-seventh of this land. We don't want any land in the desert, but where there is rain and much mineral wealth. We want fertile, productive land on which we can farm and provide our own people with sufficient food, clothing, and shelter. This government must supply us with the machinery and other tools needed to dig into the earth. Give us everything we need for them for from twenty to twenty-five years, until we can produce and supply our own needs.

If we are a part of America, then part of what she is worth belongs to us. We will take our share and depart, then this white country can have peace. What is her net worth? Give us our share in gold and silver and let us depart and go back to our homeland in peace. We want no integration with this wicked race that enslaved us. We want complete separation from this race of devils. But we should not be expected to leave America and go back to our homeland empty-handed. After four hundred years of slave labor, we have some back pay coming, a bill owed to us that must be collected.

If the government of White America truly repents of its sins against our people, and atones by giving us our true share, only then can America save herself! But if America waits for Almighty God Himself to step in and force her into a just settlement, God will take this entire continent away from her, and she will cease to exist as a nation. Her own Christian Scriptures warn her that when God comes He can give the "entire Kingdom to whomsoever He will"...which only means that the God of Justice on Judgment Day can give this entire continent to whomsoever He wills!

White America, wake up and take heed, before it is too late!

Mr. Moderator, students and faculty here at the University of California, brothers and sisters, friends and enemies. The bell up there took so long to stop ringing, I began to suspect that it was probably being manipulated by an integrationist!

Recently the state of California, the Supreme Court here, denied Negro inmates who had become converted to the religion of Islam while serving time in these penal institutions of this state, denied them the right to receive qualified Muslim religious instructors from the outside on the ground that the Muslims who follow the Honorable Elijah Muhammad are not an authentic religious group.

At the same time, the states esteemed body of educators here at the University of California barred me from speaking on this campus on the grounds that we do represent an authentic religious group. It meant that your top judicial body deprives us of our religious rights by saying we arent a bona fide religious group, and your top body of educatorsI think thats what theyd be calleddeprive us of our religious rights by saying we are a bona fide religious group.

Well, Im happy and thankful to our God, Allah, for enabling them to come to some kind of conclusion as to what we actually are. Because it confused us to see how two important branches of your state government could logically come to opposite conclusions on the same subject.

Or is it that in this state you are permitted the type of intellectual flexibility that enables your state government to speak out of both sides of its mouth in this manner at the same time? And to make certain that thered be no clarification of the misunderstanding about our religion, I read in theI think the San Francisco Chronicle, or one of your papers, yesterdaythat I was permitted to speak here as long as I didnt get into religion, or stuck to what they call secular matters.

So its not my intention to discuss the Muslim religious group today nor the Muslim religion, but I am a Muslim. But I intend to stick to secular problems. Its like inviting a Catholic priest or bishop here to speak but forbidding him to mention Catholicism or the pope. Or inviting Billy Graham and telling him not to mention Christ. Or a member of the Kennedy family and expecting him not to mention politics.

It boils down to inviting a Muslim minister to speak on what you call secular problems but denying him the right to speak religiously or from a religious point of view. Its like telling a bird to fly without his wings. Or a race horse to run without his legs. Then you condemn that bird that you have crippled yourself and condemn the horse that youve also crippled because it cant keep up. This is very hypocritical. But tomorrow, or Sunday, rather, its our intention to hold a meeting at the Civic Center in Richmond, at 1:00 p.m. at which time we intend to spell out our religious beliefs, our religious motives, and our religious objectives.

Today during the time that we have, we would like to point out that the Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that America is faced with her gravest crisis since the Civil War. Wherever we look today, whether it be in the South, the North, the East, or the West, we see ever-increasing racial tensions.
We see the increase of racial animosity, the increase of racial hostility, and the increase of outright racial hatred. We see masses of Black people who have lost all confidence in the false promises of the hypocritical white politicians. We see masses of Black people who are thoroughly fed up with the deceit of the so-called white liberals, or the white so-called liberals. White liberals who have posed as our friends, white liberals who have been eager to point out what the white man in the South is doing to our people there, while they themselves are doing the same thing to us here in the North.

They have been making a great fuss over the South only to blind us to what is happening here in the North. And now that the Honorable Elijah Muhammad has opened the eyes of Americas 20 million Blacks, we can easily see that this white fox here in the North is even more cruel and more vicious than the white wolf in the South. The southern wolves always let you know where you stand. But these northern foxes pose as white liberals. They pose as your friend, as your benefactor, as your employer, as your landlord, as your neighborhood merchant, as your lawyer. They use integration for infiltration. They infiltrate all your organizations, and in this manner, by joining you, they strangle your militant efforts toward true freedom.

Throughout America, here in the North, as well as the South, masses of Black people are demonstrating against the oppression and exploitation of the American white man. Our people have lost all fear of the white man. They have ceased to waste their love on the white man, and they have ceased turning their nonviolent cheek to the violent white man. And because of this new fearless, more militant attitude on the part of our people, we see the increase of violence and bloodshed between the white oppressor and the oppressed, the white exploiter and the exploited, the white former slavemaster and his 20 million ex-slaves.

The question that is asked, where will all of this end? I repeat, America is faced with her worst domestic crisis since the Civil War. The worst crisis since the Revolutionary War. For America now faces a race war. The entire country is on the verge of erupting into racial violence and bloodshed simply because 20 million ex-slaves here in America are demanding freedom, justice, and equality from their former slavemasters.

Twenty million so-called Negroes, second-class citizens, seeking nothing but human dignity and human rights, the right to live in dignity as a human being. And rather than give genuine sincere respect to your cry for human rights, the American white man answers your nonviolence with violence. He answers your prayers and freedom songs with false promises, deceitful maneuvers, and outright bloodshed.

According to what we were taught from the white mans textbooks in school, the Revolutionary War and the Civil War were two wars fought on American soil supposedly for freedom and democracy. But if these two wars were really fought for freedom and human dignity of all men, why are 20 million of our people still confined and enslaved here in America by second-class citizenship? The truth is that the Revolutionary War was fought on American soil to free the American white man from the English white man. The Revolutionary War was never fought to provide freedom and a democracy in this white country for the Black man. Our people remained slaves here in America even after the Declaration of Independence was signed. In fact most of the white Founding Fathers who signed the Declaration of Independence were slave owners themselves.

The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that it is sheer ignorance, insanity, for our people to celebrate the Fourth of July as Independence Day, while white America denies us the first-class citizenship that goes with independence. And it is nothing but hypocrisy on the part of the American white man to pretend that the Revolutionary War was truly a war of independence as long as 20 million Black people here in America are denied the privileges of an independent people.

The Civil War was fought on this continent, but not to free the Black slaves as is commonly taught in the white mans schools. The Civil War was actually fought to preserve the Union, to keep the country intact for white people.

The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that in essence this means the American white man fought the Revolutionary War to get this country for himself. He then fought the Civil War to keep this country intact for himself. And today he will now fight a race war to keep from having to share this country on an equal basis with anyone else but himself. Especially on an equal basis with his 20 million former slaves.

So again I ask, where will these demonstrations end? And who dares to say that our people are not justified in demonstrating our resentment over the injustice and mistreatment that our people have suffered these 400 years at the hands of this cruel, inhuman American white man?

The Black masses are crying out, What have we to lose but our chains? What have we to lose but the hell that we experience every day living in these rat-filled slums that were relegated to? The worst housing conditions in America always exist in the so-called Negro community. Yet the white liberals, who own these run-down houses, force us to pay the highest rent. Faced with this high overhead, we are forced to take in roomers in order to help make up our rent. Our apartments are filled with both relatives and strangers. Our communities soon become overcrowded. These overcrowded conditions under which our people are forced to live eliminate all chances for a normal life, a clean life, or a healthy life.

Because our children grow up in this overcrowded atmosphere, the lack of much-needed privacy destroys their sense of shame. It lowers their moral standards and leaves them exposed to every form of indecency and vice imaginable. Our young girls, our daughters, our baby sisters become unwed mothers before they are hardly out of their teens. Our community has thousands of unmarried mothers, mothers who have no hope of ever getting a husband. And our community has tens of thousands of little babies who have no father to act as their provider or protector. In fact the only provider any of our children know is the white welfare agent or the white social worker. Many of our children actually mistake the welfare agent or the white social worker for their father.

And oftentimes this is true.

The overcrowded homes of our community force us to live under some of the worst sanitary conditions imaginable. It becomes almost impossible to practice the rules of good hygiene. And therefore tuberculosis, syphilis, gonorrhea, and other destructive social diseases are on the rampage throughout our community.

Our people in the Negro community are trapped in a vicious cycle of ignorance, poverty, disease, sickness, and death. There seems to be no way out. No way of escape. The wealthy, educated Black bourgeoisie, those uppity Negroes who do escape, never reach back and pull the rest of our people out with them. The Black masses remain trapped in the slums.

And because there seems to be no hope or no other escape, we turn to wine, we turn to whiskey, and we turn to reefers, marijuana, and even to the dreadful needleheroin, morphine, cocaine, opiumseeking an escape.

Many of us turn to crime, stealing, gambling, prostitution. And some of us are used by the white overlords downtown to push dope in the Negro community among our own people. Unemployment and poverty have forced many of our people into a life of crime. But the real criminal is in the City Hall downtown, in the State House, and in the White House in Washington, D.C. The real criminal is the white liberal, the political hypocrite. And it is these legal crooks who pose as our friends, force us into a life of crime, and then use us to spread the white mans evil vices in our community among our own people.

The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that our people are scientifically maneuvered by the white man into a life of poverty. Because we are forced to live in the poorest sections of the city, we attend inferior schools. We have inferior teachers and we get an inferior education. The white power structure downtown makes certain that by the time our people do graduate, we wont be equipped or qualified for anything but the dirtiest, heaviest, poorest-paying jobs. Jobs that no one else wants.

We are trapped in a vicious cycle of economic, intellectual, social, and political death. Inferior jobs, inferior housing, inferior education which in turn again leads to inferior jobs. We spend a lifetime in this vicious circle. Or in this vicious cycle going in circles. Giving birth to children who see no hope or future but to follow in our miserable footsteps.

So we thank God for the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. We who are Muslims saw no way out until we accepted the religion of Islam and the spiritual guidance of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. We saw no solution to our problems. We saw no real leader among our people.

But today the whole world is talking about the Honorable Elijah Muhammad and the divine solution he received from the God of our forefathers. Not your God but from the God of our forefathers. Not a temporary solution which will benefit only the handpicked upper-class Negroes, but a solution divinely designed to solve the plight of the Black masses in this country permanently and forever.

The government does not want our people to listen and understand the solution that God has given the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. The government is against Mr. Muhammad because the government is against our God. In order to trick our people away from Gods true solutions, the government is trying to deceive our people with a false solution, a phony solution, a deceitful solution called token integration. I may add, whenever you get on the bus or the subway or the streetcar and you have to use a token, that token is not the real thing but it is a substitute for the real thing. And wherever you have a token, you have a substitute. And wherever you have token integration, you dont have anything but a substitute for integration and theres no real integration anywhere in North AmericaNorth, South, East, or West, not even in San Francisco, Oakland, or Berkeley.

Has the government effort to bribe our people with token integration made our plight better, or has it made it worse? When you tried to integrate the white community in search of better housing, the whites there fled to the suburbs. And the community that you thought would be integrated soon deteriorated into another all-Black slum. What happened to the liberal whites? Why did they flee? We thought that they were supposed to be our friends. And why did the neighborhood deteriorate only after our people moved in?

It is the tricky real estate agents posing as white liberal friends who encourage our people to force their way into white communities, and then they themselves sell these integrated houses at such high prices that our people again are forced to take in roomers to offset the high house notes. This creates in the new area the same overcrowded conditions, and the new community soon deteriorates into the same slum conditions from which we thought we had escaped. The only one who has benefited is the white real estate agent who poses as our friend, as a liberal, and who sells us the house in a community destined by his own greedy schemes to become nothing but a high-priced slum area.

Today our people can see that integrated housing has not solved our problems. At best it was only a temporary solution. One in which only the wealthy, handpicked Negroes found temporary benefit.

After the 1954 Supreme Court desegregation decision, the same thing happened when our people tried to integrate the schools. All the white students disappeared into the suburbs. Now the caliber of what our people thought was to be an integrated school has fallen to the same level of the slum school from which we thought we had escaped. Just as efforts to integrate housing failed miserably, efforts to integrate schools have been an even more miserable failure.

Having failed to get integrated housing and failed to get integrated schools, now the Negro leaders are demanding integrated jobs. That is they are demanding a certain quota, or percentage, of white peoples jobs.

First the Negro leadership demanded the white mans house, and the whites vacated their run-down houses for us and built new homes for themselves out in the suburbs. Then the Negro leaders demanded seats for our children in the white mans schools. The whites evacuated the schools as our children moved in and they built modern schools for themselves in the suburbs. But now the Negro leadership is demanding the white mans job. Can the whites vacate their jobs like they did their homes and their schools and move to the suburbs and create more jobs? No. Not without violence and bloodshed. The same white liberals who used to praise our people for their patient nonviolent approach have now become openly impatient and violent themselves in defense of their own jobs. Not only in the South but also in the North, even here in the Bay Area.

For thirty-three years the Honorable Elijah Muhammad has been warning us that the time would come when the white man would not have enough jobs for himself much less enough jobs for our people. So the present demand of our people for more of the white mans jobs must lead to violence and bloodshed. It may even lead to a race wara bloody race war. And it is the government itself that is now pressing the people of this country into a racial bloodbath.

But the white man is misjudging the times and he is underestimating the American so-called Negro because were living in a new day. Our people are now a new people. That old Uncle Tomtype Negro is dead. Our people have no more fear of anyone, no more fear of anything. We are not afraid to go to jail. We are not afraid to give our very life itself. And were not afraid to take the lives of those who try to take our lives. We believe in a fair exchange. We believe in a fair exchange. An eye for an eye. A tooth for a tooth. A head for a head and life for a life. If this is the price of freedom, we wont hesitate to pay the price.

By trying to oppose the divine solution that God has given to the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, the American government will actually provoke another Civil War. That is, this governmentand especially that present administration in Washington, D.C.will provoke a civil war among whites by trying to force them to give up their jobs and homes and schools to our people. And our people will provoke a race war by trying to take the white mans jobs and his schools and his home away from him.

This racial dilemma poses a serious problem for white America. Civil war between whites on the one hand, a race war between the whites and their 20 million ex-slaves on the other hand. And the entire dark world is watching, waiting to see what the American government will do to solve this problem once and for all.

We must have a permanent solution. A temporary solution wont do. Tokenism will no longer suffice. The Honorable Elijah Muhammad has the only permanent solution. Twenty million ex-slaves must be permanently separated from our former slavemaster and placed on some land that we can call our own. Then we can create our own jobs. Control our own economy. Solve our own problems instead of waiting on the American white man to solve our problems for us.

The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that on our own land we can set up farms, factories, businesses. We can establish our own government and become an independent nation. And once we become separated from the jurisdiction of this white nation, we can then enter into trade and commerce for ourselves with other independent nations. This is the only solution.

The Honorable Elijah Muhammad says that in our own land we can establish our own agricultural system. We can grow food to feed our own people. We can raise cattle and use the hides, the leather, and the wool to clothe our people. We can dig the clay from the earth and make bricks to build homes for our people. We can turn the trees into lumber and furnish the homes for our own people. He says that we can dig the natural resources from the earth once we are in our own land. Land is the basis of all economic security. Land is essential to freedom, justice, and equality. Land is essential to true independence. And the Honorable Elijah Muhammad says we must be separated from the American white man, returned to our own land where we can live among our own people. This is the only true solution.

For just as the biblical government of Egypt under Pharaoh was against Moses because Moses had been directed by God to separate the Hebrew slaves from Pharaoh and lead them out of the house of bondage to a land of their own, today this modern house of bondage under the authority of the American government opposes this modern Moses. Opposes the Honorable Elijah Muhammads efforts to separate our people, who have been made slaves here in this country, and lead us to a land of our own.

The government opposes the Honorable Elijah Muhammads efforts to wake us up, clean us up, and stand us on our own feet so we can follow him out of this house of bondage to our own land where we can live among our own people. Just as the government of biblical Egypt was against the God of the Hebrew slaves, today the American government is against the God of her Negro slaves, the God of our forefathers. And just as that Pharaoh tried to trick the Hebrew slaves into rejecting the offers of salvation from their God by deceiving them with false promises through hired magicians and carefully staged demonstrations like the recent ridiculous march on Washington, today this government is paying certain elements of the Negro leadership to deceive our people into thinking that were going to get accepted soon into the mainstream of American life.

The government is deceiving our people with false promises so we wont want to return to our own land and people. The government is saying, Stay here, dont listen to this Muhammad, we will desegregate the lunch counters and the theaters and the parks and the toiletsmeaning this public accommodation thing where you can sit on a toilet with a white person or in a toilet with a white person.
 Well give you more civil rights bills. We wont give you civil rights, but well give you civil rights bills. The government promises our people this only to keep you from listening to the Honorable Elijah Muhammad and to stop us from waking up. They know that if we listen to the Honorable Elijah Muhammad long enough, we will begin to do our own thinking. Hell make us see, hear, think, and able to speak for ourselves.

Whenever you become fed up in this country with the white mans brutality and you get set to take matters in your own hands in order to defend yourself and your people, the same governmentand again I repeat, especially that Catholic administration in Washington, D.C.tries to pacify our people with deceitful promises of tricky civil rights legislation that is never designed to be a true solution to our problem. Civil rights legislation will never solve our problems. The white liberals are nothing but political hypocrites who use our people as political footballs only to get bills passed that will increase their own power.

The present proposed civil rights legislation will give the present administration dictatorial powers and make America a legal police state, but still wont solve the race problem. The present administration is only using civil rights as a political football to gain more legislation and power for itself. Our people are being used as pawns in the game of power politics by political hypocrites. They dont want our people to listen to the Honorable Elijah Muhammad because they know he will make themmake us see them as they really are.

So I say in my conclusion, the Honorable Elijah Muhammads message and solution is simple. He says: Since we are not wanted in this country, lets pack our bags and go back home to our own people, to our own land. The propaganda of the American government is skillfully designed to make our people think that our people back home dont want us. Government propagandists tell us constantly, Africa is a jungle. Africans are savage and backward. They have no modern conveniences and youre too much like us white folks. How could you live comfortably back there?

This propaganda is government strategy against the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, realizing that his mission is to teach our people the truth about our own kind, clean us up, and then return us to our own land and unite us with our own people. The American government turns us against our own kind in order to keep us from making a mass exodus out of this country where we can live at home among our own people.

Therefore, the Honorable Elijah Muhammad says, American propaganda is designed to make us think that no matter how much hell we catch here, were still better off in America than wed be anywhere else. They want us to think we have no place else to go. And many of our so-called intellectuals who pose as our leaders and spokesmen actually believe that we have no place else to go. So their solution to our problem is that we stay here and continue to catch hell from the American white man.

But the only permanent solution is complete separation or some land of our own in a country of our own. All other courses will lead to violence and bloodshed. It will lead to the destruction of America, and it will also lead to the destruction of our people who fall for it. So his message is flee for your lives and save yourselves. And I thank you.

* * *

Question: In the last issue of Muhammad Speaks there was an article telling of the elimination of racial discrimination in Cuba; telling how Afro- and Latin- Cubans lived in harmony. How does this jibe with the devil concept of the white man and that the idea that freedom can only be achieved through separation?

Malcolm X: The Cubans dont refer to themselves either as white people or Black people. They refer to themselves as people. You find the American white man is the one who has laid such stress on being white or being black. When you become a Muslim, you dont look at a man as being black, brown, red, or yellow. You look upon him as being a man. And this is something that is foreign to the American concept.

I dont know anything about Cuba. The article was written by Howard, a UN correspondent who spent time in Cuba along with the son of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad when all of the students went. And they did say that they found a great deal of equality, freedom, and justice among the people of Cuba. So I think that in that direction Castro has made a great accomplishment and contribution, but I havent been there myself.

Now, when you try and bring the same thing about between the American white man and the American Black man, youre dealing with a man who used to have as total possession over the Black people in this country as a farmer has possession over his cow, his chickens, his horse. And this has created an attitude among American whites that they themselves find almost impossible to eliminate. And unless it is eliminated and until it is eliminated the problem will get worse instead of better. I personally dont think it will ever be eliminated.

Question: How do you intend to gain possession of this land that you want and how do you intend to get there?

Malcolm X: Thats a good question. Number one, we didnt have any trouble getting to America because the white man...by that I mean we werent Pilgrims. We didnt come on the Mayflower, and we didnt come from Europe, and we didnt come of our own volition. We were brought here in chains at the bottom of a slave ship. And since we didnt pay transportation here, the Honorable Elijah Muhammad says that the contribution that the Black man made in this country, which amounts to 310 years of slave labor for which we have never been given a dime or a cent, places a burden upon the American white man today for which the government should pay. And he says that our people should be allowed to go back to our own homeland, that the government itself should supply us with the transportation.

And that they should supply us with the machinery and the tools necessary that will enable us to dig the soil and develop our own agricultural system and feed ourselves for the next twenty to twenty-five years until we are in a position to be completely independent and stand on our own feet. And he says that if the government does not want a mass exodus of Black people from this country back to our own homeland, since we cannot live in peace, together, mixed up on this continent, the alternative to that solution is to divide a separate part of this country into which our people can migrate.

For your clarification, because this has been brought up, some people say, Well, why should the government do this? If this government can send billions of dollars to Communist countries like Poland and Yugoslavia and to neutralist countries in Asia and Africa, who have never made any contribution whatsoever to the sum, net worth of this economy and country, and at the same time, this government feels that it is too much to set about something real to solve the problem for the slaves who made a greater contribution than even your people did, why the government doesnt even deserve to continue to function as a government.

Question: You mentioned again, just now, land set aside for your people, sir. What land is available thats not already possessed by others?

Malcolm X: When you came to this country the land was inhabited by the Indians and you didnt have any problem then.

Question: Actually, I have two questions. The first one I would like to ask you: Do you believe in Islam just because it gives you dignity as a Black man living in America? Or do you believe in Islam as a whole? So, if you believe in Islam as a whole, you know that Islam believes in socialism rather than capitalism. This is the first question. The second question: You said that Muhammad taught you that you should have your own land so you can find all, to do what you want in it. Will you please give me one statement either from the Quran or from Muhammads speeches which says, you know, asks for this situation?

Malcolm X: If I understood my Muslim brother correctly, I hope that hes aware of the fact that my opening statement pointed out that the front page of the San Francisco Chronicle, I think it was, told me that the only way I could come here and speak was to speak on secular matters rather than religious, and for that reason I pointed out at the outset that I wasnt going to get onto the religion of Islam. Since you, as a student I imagine, brought it up, it does open the door for me to reply and I thank you for it. Number one, Islam is a word which means in Arabic complete submission to the will of God. Complete obedience to the will of God. And this meansand the Jews referred to this God as Jehovah. Theyre monotheistic. The Christians referred to him, I think, as Christ. Only theyre polytheistic, and its difficult to give one name to their many gods.

So that in Islam, since we believe that there is one God, we believe that all of the prophets who came forth on this earth taught the same religion. Abraham was a Muslim; Moses was a Muslim; Jesus was a Muslim. And as Black men in America, we accept the religion of Islam because we recognize it as the true religion of God. This is why Im a Muslim. I am a Muslim because the Honorable Elijah Muhammad has taught me that Islam is Gods only religion. And it does say in the Holy Qur'an that this religion will overcome all other religions.

We believe that were living in the day and the time and at the hour when God intends to make this religion, Islam, overcome all other religions. This is why were Muslims. And we want to separate ourselves from America, because we believe that when God comes to establish the religion of Islam or the kingdom of Islam or the world of Islam, he cant do so without first destroying all other religions, governments, nations and worlds that stand in his way. All governments that wont accept one religion and practice the principles of brotherhood, freedom, justice, and equality among all people, regardless of color, regardless of race or anything else involved, we believe that theyll be destroyed today, and we dont think that you can get the American people to accept the religion of Islam. I have no knowledge of socialism. Thats something else.

Question: Sir, you seem to interchange the term white liberal with hypocritical politician. I dont believe this is true. I dont believe that our white liberals are in office. They are, by the way, investigating

Moderator: Do you have a question please?

Question: I just wondered why you interchanged these terms when theyre so evidently not interchangeable.

Malcolm X: Historically in America, the white liberal has been the one always supposedly who has the solution to the race problem. An example: the leading white liberal in American history was supposed to be Abraham Lincoln. Hes the one who has been dangled in front of our people as a God who brought us out of slavery into the promised land of freedom. Martin Luther King last year was begging President Kennedy to issue another Emancipation Proclamation. If the Emancipation Proclamation of Abraham Lincoln was authentic and produced the results that it was supposed to and if it had been sincere, it would have gotten results. Then Martin Luther King wouldnt have to be begging for another proclamation of emancipation today.


And other timesthe white liberals supposedly fought the Civil War to free the slaves, and our people are still slaves, still begging for freedom. Some more white liberals came along with the so-called Thirteenth, Fourteenth, Fifteenth, and other amendments to the Constitution supposedly to solve our problem. The Constitution has been amended and the problem is still here. Nine white liberals on the Supreme Court bench came up with a desegregation decision in 1954 supposedly to desegregate the schools, and the schools havent been desegregated yet. Kennedy ran on a platform as a white liberal three years ago and said all he had to do was take out his fountain pen and put his name on some paper and our problem would be solved, and it was three years in office before he found where his fountain pen was, and the problem isnt solved yet.

Question: Im a second-generation American, and my people came over in the bottom of ships. And they had second-class citizenship in Europe, and they lived in ghettos and things of this sort, and they got out of them. How come I have attitudes toward Negroes that may be prejudiced? Where did I get these attitudes, if they werent from the Negro people? None of my people ever owned slaves, or anything of this sort. How did I get my prejudices?

Malcolm X: If you didnt steal the property, you can be held responsible today for being in possession of stolen goods. The book says that the sins of the fathers will be visited upon the heads of the children even unto the seventh generation. And although there are many whites who came here from Europe after 1865, they fit right into the whole, overall pattern of exploitation, of modern slavery, that still exists in this country today. Because its only a modern form of slavery that our people experience today, and white liberals, again, encourage us to join groups that they set up that they call the National AdvanceNational Association for the Advancement of Some Colored People, from ancient slavery to modern slavery. If I may add, your mention of white immigrants just coming here proves the inability of Negroes to solve this problem by the present course, or the past course that theyve been taking. Its true, Italians, French, Spanish, and others came here as immigrants, uneducated, poverty-stricken. And their parents were able to open up stores. Little stores. They lived in the back, sent their children to school. Their children studied business and came back and expanded the businesses, and most businesses in the white community are called so-and-so brothers, so-and-so and son, and so forth. This is how you established what you call the American economy, somewhatspeaking on the run.

Negroes have been here, free, since 1865, so-called, have a purchasing power of $20 billion per year, have more education than any group, any minority group on this earth. You cant go in the Negro community anywhere in the Bay Area and find five businesses owned by Negroes, so-and-so and son or so-and-so brothers.

The mistake that we made differs from the mistake you didnt make. Your parents solved your problems economically, of their own volition, with their own ingenuity. Our leaders have done nothing to teach us how to go in business. They have done nothing to teach us how to elevate the level of our schools. Theyve done nothing to teach us how to keep up the standard of our community.

It is not some masses of Black people who are at fault for this. Its this Negro puppet that the white liberal has set over the Negro community to act as our leader and act as our spokesman who has failed to show us how to solve our own problems. So we remain crippled, and accept to follow the advice of this white liberal who does nothing but continue to exploit us instead of trying to help us solve the problem. Hope I didnt answer you too long.

Moderator: We have time for only one more question, Im afraid, and I recognize this gentleman.

Question: Id like to ask Mr. X simply, why cannot a Negro infiltrate the political machine and use power politics to his own end?

Malcolm X: If he studies the science of politics, he probably would. Most Negroes dont. They become involved politically from an emotional point of view rather than a scientific point of view. You show me a Negro politician, and Ill show you one whos controlled by the white political machine. And if you show me one who isnt controlled by the white political machine, Ill show you one whom the white political machine has labeled as a racist, an extremist.

Adam Powell is one of the best examples of it. Anyone that they endorse, who will do what they want him to do, hes all right. But when you become politically independent in this country, the white media, they label you as a racist. The reason for this is, the only way you can become politically independent of the white political machine is to have the support of the Black masses. The only way you can get the support of the Black masses is to say how they think and how they feel. And when you begin to speak to the Black masses, how they feel and think, then the whites call you a racist. Because you have to talk in the context of the intense degree of dissatisfaction that exists in the Negro community.

Whites dont want to hear this. They want to be told that the problem is being solved. Youre not solving the problem for anybody but a few handpicked, Uncle Tom Negroes who benefit from your token integration. And as long as you deal with that, youre going to be adding more powder to a keg thats inside your house that can blow you higher, that could explode, higher than a million-megaton bomb. So when you go down here and find how the masses of Black people really feel, youre too intelligent to act as you are, if you know how they really feel. And the only Black man who will tell you exactly how a Black man feels is the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. The rest of them are going to talk to you out of the corner of their mouth. Try and make friends with you.

On behalf of my beloved leader and teacher, the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, and the many young Muslims who follow him, we wish to thank you for this opportunity to explain our position today in what we feel to be the only solution to the serious race problems confronting America and the entire troubled Western World.

In this crucial hour in which we live today, it is essential that our minds constantly be kept open to reality. We have both races here in this Yale Law School Auditorium tonight. Let us not be emotional. Let us be governed and guided only by facts.

I represent Mr. Elijah Muhammad, the spiritual head of the fastest-growing group of Black Muslims in the Western Hemisphere. We who follow him know that he has been divinely taught and sent to us by God Himself. We believe that the miserable plight of the 20 million black people in America is the fulfillment of divine prophecy. We believe that the serious race problem that our presence here poses for America is also the fulfillment of divine prophecy. We also believe the presence today in America of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, his teachings among the so-called Negroes, and his naked warning to America concerning her treatment of these so-called Negroes is all the fulfillment of divine prophecy.

Thus, when Mr. Muhammad declares that the only solution to Americas race problem is complete separation of the two races, he is fulfilling that which was predicted by all of the biblical prophets to take place in this day. But, because Mr. Muhammad takes this uncompromising stand, those who dont understand biblical prophecy wrongly label him as a racist and as a hate teacher, or as being anti-white, or as teaching Black Supremacy. So tonight, while we are all here together, face to face, we can question and examine for ourselves the wisdom or the folly of what Mr. Muhammad is teaching.

Studying world conditions in the light of facts, facing reality as grown men and women...seeing things not as we would like them to be, but as they really are...only then can we determine the rightness, the validity, the divine origin of Mr. Muhammad and the solution which he offers as the only hope for Americas 20 million so-called Negroes, and also as the only hope for this troubled Western World.


If Mr. Muhammads solution is from God, is it in time to save 20 million so-called Negroes? Is it in time to save America? Is it in time to save the Western World? Let us look closely and see.

The Western World finds itself today constantly engulfed in crisis after crisis. The ingredients for disaster lurk constantly on all sides...both at home and abroad. The Western Worlds leading diplomats are whispering in the halls of the UN that catastrophe can come any moment, any hour, any second.

Whether this grave crisis be studied at the international level, the national level, or the local level, we will discover the primary ingredient always encountered, in one form or another, is the race issue...the race question...the race problem. Whether it is the Congo, Algeria, South Africa, China, Cuba, or Panama.

Let us take the advice Paul gave in the Bible; let us toss our emotions aside and reason together. Let us look closely at this chaotic world picture before us, and in the light of the facts let us then determine if Mr. Muhammads divine solution fits the picture before us.

But many of you may be asking yourselves: "Why should we listen to this little so-called Negro...this little Georgia-born ex-slave? What can he do? What can he tell us?"

Well, my friends, the Western Worlds most learned diplomats have failed to solve this grave race problem. Her learned politicians have failed. Her learned theologians have failed. Her learned legal experts have failed. Her sociologists have failed. Her civil leaders have failed. Her fraternal leaders have even failed.

Since the Western Worlds most skillful scientists and scholars have failed to solve this race problem, it is time for us to sit down tonight and reason together, and Im certain we will be forced to agree that it takes God Himself to solve this grave racial dilemma. When we face these facts, we see the necessity for divine intervention...we see the necessity for a divine solution.

If God is going to intervene, will He come Himself, or will He send someone with His solution? Will we be able to accept this divine solution when it comes? How will we know if the Messenger who brings us the solution is really a man from God? What yardstick will we use to measure him.

Will this man of God be someone from Harvard, Yale, Columbia, Howard, or Tuskegee? Will this man of God be a black man or a white man? Will he be a theologian or preacher from one of the prevailing religions of the Western World? Will he be a politician from one of the major political parties? What type of man do you think God would choose to deliver His solution to this troubled Western World? How are we to determine whether or not Mr. Muhammad is a man from God and, how are we to determine if it is time for God Himself to intervene?

Let us not be emotional; let us reason together. Look around us at the condition of the world. Never before has man had in his hands the power to destroy human life on such a vast scale. Never before has there been such propaganda, mass lies, mass suspicion, mass confusion, mass dissatisfaction, mass unrest, mass hatreds...and the ingredients for such mass bloodshed.

Never before has America made so many crucial blunders, one after another, and suffered such great loss of prestige in the eyes of the world, despite the advice of her expert advisors.

The U-2 spy plane incident caused the President of the strongest country on earth to be tricked, trapped and exposed before the whole world as a liar...despite the advice of expert advisors.

At the Paris Summit Conference, the same President was cursed, ridiculed, and humiliated again before the eyes of the entire world...despite the advice of his expert advisors.

In Korea, students, mere children, toppled the government of Syngman Rhee, the best friend America had in the Far East, despite the advice of her expert advisors.

In Turkey, children toppled the government of Menderes, Americas best friend in the Middle East...despite the advice of expert advisors.

In Tokyo, students, mere children again, defied the President to come to Japan, and blocked him from entering after he had traveled thousands of miles from home and had arrived at their back door...a most humiliating insult...despite the advice of his expert advisors.

And Cuba, a little midget island government in the Caribbean, is challenging Giant America, accusing her of economic aggression, confiscating all of her investments, and getting unexpected support from Mexico and other strategically located Latin American countries...and all of this, despite the advice of her expert advisors.

My friends, if the expert politicians, the expert theologians, the expert diplomats and other scientists, professors and scholars have failed to devise a solution to these grave world problems, surely you will agree that it is now time for God to send us someone with a solution from Himself.

Is Mr. Muhammad from God? Is he on time? Does his divine solution fit the events of today?

Look at the racial volcano that has erupted in the Congo, with the ingredients present for an even greater racial explosion building up into what could easily touch off the dreaded Third World War...and once again the diplomats in the UN are whispering that Western Civilization is tottering on the brink of disaster.

Why are the Africans in the Congo rising against the white Belgian oppressors? Why are the Africans in Kenya rising against their white British oppressors? Why are the Africans in Angola rising against their white Portuguese oppressors? Why are the Africans in Algeria rising against their white French oppressors? In short: Why is the black man today all over Africa rising up against his white European overlords?

In the Congo, Central Africa, the black man is saying, We must have our own land. In Kenya, East Africa, the black man is saying, We must have our own land. In Angola, West Africa, the black man is saying, We must have our own land. In Algeria, North Africa, the black man is saying, We must have our own land. Even deep into South Africa, all over the entire African continent, the only solution in the minds of the awakening black man is: We must have our own land.

The cry of the black man in Africa for the return of his own land is so widespread, so unrelenting, so uncompromising...it stands to reason that only God Himself is inspiring him and driving him onward in this spirit of freedom. If God has made the black man in Africa realize he cannot rest until he has some land of his own...surely that same God will look westward toward America and see 20 million black people here, second-class citizens, who are also in dire need of some land that we can call our own.

If Mr. Muhammad says some land of our own is Gods solution to this grave race problem, why land? Why is land so important to everyone today?

The white man in Great Britain could once boast that his control extended over so much of the black mans land that the sun never set on the British Empire. Today, when the sun rises, we can hardly find the British Empire.

How important is land? Well, look what happened to the British Empire when she lost the lands she had colonized in Asia: lands like India, China, Burma, Malaya, etc. Her inability to continue robbing Asia of the natural resources produced by the land almost wrecked the British economy, decreased her military strength and her political prestige so low she could no longer use force to hold her African colonies.

As her grip on the black mans land loosened, Britain dwindled. Loss of land meant loss of Empire...loss of wealth, power, and of prestige.

As the black men in Africa and Asia regain control over their lands, the French, Belgians, Dutch, Portuguese, Spanish, and all other European Empires also begin to crumble and topple downward.

As we face these facts, we are forced to agree that the economy of white Europe, the military power of white Europe, and the political prestige of white Europe was based upon the lands in Africa and Asia which they had taken from the black man.

The combined powers of white Europe have not been able to stem this black tide in Africa that is sweeping aside the shackles of colonial slavery. The Africans have become militant and are marching toward freedom. Africa is the only continent where a new nation is being born every day...and these new nations are taking their seats in the family of other independent nations symbolized by the United Nations.

And, this fast-growing black block formed by these newly born African nations, united with our darker brothers in Asia, can already easily out-vote the white colonial powers in the UN who had formerly enslaved them. These newly born independent black nations can also take a firm stand in behalf of other black people all over the world who are still enslaved, persecuted, exploited, or deprived of their basic rights.

As the rise of these newly independent black nations collapses the economic, military, and political strength of Americas allies in white Europe, what effect does this have upon white America?

Does white America face the same black web in which the colonial powers of white Europe find themselves entangled? And, if so, how will this affect Americas attitude toward the black people of Africa? How will this affect Americas attitude toward the 20 million black people who are yet suffering the bondage of so-called second-class citizenship right here in America...20 million so-called Negroes who have also been deprived of freedom, justice, and equality...20 million so-called Negroes who not only have been deprived of their civil rights, but who have even been deprived of their human rights...the right to hold their heads up, and to live in dignity like other human beings.

Let us not be emotional, but let us face these facts. Let us reason together. This has become a serious problem for America, and for the entire world.

Will the Divine Solution that God has given Mr. Elijah Muhammad help white America avert the racial dilemma in which the awakening dark nations of Africa and Asia have already placed Americas allies in white Europe?

Before we can intelligently decide to accept or reject Mr. Muhammads solution, let us take a closer look at America itself: America is the richest and most powerful nation on this earth. Her President is almost like a god, for he has in his hands almost every other country on this earth. Therefore, every four years, when a new President, or god, is about to be selected, the eyes of even the foreign nations are turned toward the American elections...for they too are wondering who, what type of man, will be the next god.

Yet, at the two great political conventions in which the two candidates are selected, despite Americas need to impress, and favourably influence the foreign nations, foreign policy is never the great controversial issue...the controversial issue is always over domestic policy...the civil rights issue...in which the so-called American Negro is the primary figure...the star on the world stage...for it is he who holds the balance of power in all elections... it is he who can easily determine who will be the next god.

Therefore, this great political drama not only stars the Negro, but all the political schemes are designed primarily to woo him, to please him, to tempt him, ensnare him, to get his allegiance and capitalize upon his political support.

The Negros position is most strategic, but his mental condition is too pathetic for him to take intelligent advantage of this vital position fate has placed him in. The American Negro is suffering from a mental sickness. His mind has been tampered with by his slave master.

The Western World is sick. America is sick...but the Negro in America is the sickest of them all. The sickening condition of the Negro in America is infecting Uncle Sams entire body and endangering the security and future of the whole Western World.

Mr. Muhammad says that only after the American Negros condition is corrected will Uncle Sams health improve...for only then will Uncle Sam look healthy in the inquiring eyes of the fast-awakening dark world.

Since we see the vital necessity of correcting the miserable condition of the American Negro, and we must also agree that all other efforts to solve this problem have failed, will Mr. Muhammads prescription cure the ailments of these 20 million second-class citizens?

Many of you will say: No! Muhammad is a Black Supremacist. He is an extremist. He stresses race too much. He is a racist. My friends: If you were to see a man attired in white, with a sharp instrument in his hands, bending over someone who is prostrate on a table, your lack of understanding might compel you to shout, murderer! But when you know the place is a hospital, the sleeping man is a patient, the man attired in white is a surgeon, and the sharp instrument must be used to perform some surgery that is necessary to save the patients life, you can then accept the fact that although the operation is very painful, it must be performed.

Uncle Sam is sick, because he has a black lump growing in his white body that doesnt belong there, and this black growth is getting larger every day, and increasing Uncle Sams internal pains. God Himself has ordained that this surgery must be performed, for if the 20 million rapidly increasing so-called Negroes are not separated from the white parts of the body, it will soon cause the death and destruction of Uncle Sam.

God has given Mr. Muhammad some sharp truth. It is like a two-edged sword. It cuts into you. It causes you great pain, but if you can take it, it will cure you and save you from what otherwise would be certain death.

In your mental anguish many of you will emotionally insist that Mr. Muhammad is not teaching the real religion of Islam. You will still insist that he is teaching a racial, economic, and political philosophy.

My friends, Islam is the religion taught by all of the prophets: Noah, Lot, Abraham, Moses, and even Jesus. Islam is the true name of the religion God gave to the prophets in the past to cure their people of whatever moral or spiritual ailments that were afflicting them in that day.

Since we have examined the ailments of the crumbling Western World, and the ills that are infecting America...let us look more closely at the miserable condition of the American Negro.

Here are 20 million people who have lost their original identity; they cannot even speak their own mother tongue. How can 20 million people lose their language? What happened to it? What was it? Why dont they at least know what it was?

Why dont the educated Negroes know something about their own history, their own culture, the last names of their forefathers, their own nationality, their own country, their own flag, their own religion, and their own God?

My friends, surely you will agree that no other people in history, biblical or otherwise, have been so completely stripped and robbed by their slave master of all knowledge concerning their own kind, and because of this, no other people in history, biblical or otherwise, have ever presented such a problem to their former slave masters or to the world...as the problem created by the presence of the 20 million so-called Negroes here in America today.

The New York Tribune, in an editorial (Feb. 5, 1960), pointed out that out of 11 million qualified Negro voters, only 2,700,000 actually took time to vote. This means that, roughly speaking, only 3 million of the 11 million Negroes who are qualified to vote take an active part...and the remaining 8 million remain voluntarily inactive, and yet it is this small minority of Negro voters who help determine who will be the next President.

If who will be the next President can be influenced by 3 million Negro voters, it is easy to see why the presidential candidates of both political parties put on such a false show with the civil rights bill, and with promises of integration. They must woo or impress the 3 million voting Negroes who are the actual integration seekers.

If so much fuss is made over these 3 million integration seekers, what would the presidential candidates have to do to appease the 8 million non-voting Negroes if they ever decided to become politically active in this election year?

Who are the 8 million non-voting Negroes, what do they want, and why dont they vote?

The 3 million voters are the so-called middle- (or high- ) class Negroes, referred to by Howard University Sociology Professor E. Franklin Frazier, as the Black Bourgeoisie, who have been educated to think as patriotic individualists, with no racial pride...who believe in, and look forward to, the future integrated, intermarried society promised them by the Negro politicians...and therefore, this integration-minded 3 million remain an active part of the white-controlled political parties. But it must never be overlooked, that these 3 million integration seekers are only a small minority of the 11 million qualified voters. The 8 million non-voting Negroes are the majority, the downtrodden black masses. They have refused to vote, or to take part in politics, because they reject the Uncle Tom approach of the clergy-politician leadership that has been hand- picked for the American Negroes by the white man himself.

The clergy-politician leadership does not speak for the Negro majority; they dont speak for the black masses. They speak for the Black Bourgeoisie, the brainwashed, white-minded, middle-class minority who, because they are ashamed of being black, and dont want to be identified with black or as being black, are seeking to lose this identity by mingling, mixing, intermarrying, and integrating with the white man.

The race problem cannot be solved by listening to this white-minded, brainwashed minority. The white man must try to learn what does the majority want. The next President would be wise to try and learn what the black masses want. And, the only way to find this out is by listening to the man who speaks for the black masses of America.

I declare to you and to the entire world, that the man here in America who speaks for the majority, the downtrodden, dissatisfied black masses, is this same man whom so many thousands of our people are looking toward to see and hear, this same Mr. Muhammad who is labeled by you as a Black Supremacist, and as a Racist!

If the 3 million middle-class Negroes are casting their ballots for integration and intermarriage...what do the non-voting black masses who are in the minority want? Find out what the black masses want, and then perhaps Americas grave race problem can be solved.

The black masses are tired of following these hand-picked Negro leaders who sound like professional beggars, as they cry year after year for white America to accept us as first-class citizens.

Since this clergy-politician leadership, which was carefully hand-picked for us by the white man, has failed to solve the problem for the downtrodden black masses, God Himself has stepped into the picture, and has made Messenger Elijah Muhammad a wise, fearless, and uncompromising spokesman for the 20 million black people here in America, who, behind the Divine Leadership of this man of God, will now never be satisfied until we have a home in a land that we can proudly call our own.


We have accepted your invitation to come here to Yale University Law School this evening to let you know first hand why 20 million so-called Negroes cannot integrate with white America, why white America, after 100 years of religious hypocrisy and political trickery will never accept us as first-class citizens here...and why we must therefore seek some separate territory of our own.

In your blind emotion, again many of you will cry out that this is wrong, that this is not religion, that this is not Islam, that this is just another economic-political philosophy. I must remind you to keep an open mind. Let your own Christian Bible be the judge.

You credit Moses with being a religious man, a man of God, doing Gods work. Yet, what did Moses actually do? What did Moses teach? Moses freed his people from their slave master. Moses told the oppressor of his people: Let my people go. Moses separated his people from their masters, and then led them into a separate territory of their own.

You admit Moses was a man of God, yet you will have to agree Moses did not teach integration. Moses taught separation. Moses didnt take time to dwell on religious practices. He just let his people know that he represented the God of their forefathers, whose desire it was for them to be separated from their slave master and placed in a land that they could call their own. Mr. Muhammads message and mission today is the same as that of the biblical Moses. Mr. Muhammad is a modern Moses in this modern-day house of bondage.

Many of you will cry out that you dont go by what Moses said or did, but rather by what Jesus said. You claim that Jesus taught love and that Mr. Muhammad teaches hate.

But, my friends, have you really read the Bible? Are you familiar with Luke 14:26 where Jesus taught: If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yes, and even his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.

In other words, Jesus taught that you must hate everyone in your family, even your own self...and Muhammad teaches us to love our brothers and sisters... yet you say Muhammad teaches hate and that Jesus taught love.

Many of you will say that Jesus was no respecter of persons, that he came to all the world. You say Muhammad bars white people, therefore he cant be from God.

My friends, Jesus told his followers to go not the way of the Gentiles, go only to the lost sheep. He definitely advised his followers to discriminate and make a distinction between the Gentiles and the lost sheep.

But you still cry out that Jesus is coming back at the end of the world to make us all the same, make us one people...integrate us.

No, my friends, Jesus himself did not even advocate integration. He referred to the end of this world as that great harvest time. He likened the people of today as wheat and tares, who would be allowed to grow together, or integrated, until God comes at the end of this world and separates the people Himself...then He would cause one to be burned in a Lake of Fire, and those whom He chooses for Himself, He would save.

Jesus also spoke of the people of today as being like sheep and goats, whom God would separate at the end of the world...some for salvation and some for destruction.

Jesus did not advocate integration; he advocated separation!

Noahs solution was not integration; in his day it was also a message of separation. Lots solution was separation. And, remember, my friends, Jesus warned that as it was in the days of Noah and Lot, so shall it be these last days...not integration, but complete separation of the two races...or destruction!
Surely you can now see that Mr. Muhammads message, or solution, is the same as that of Noah, Lot, Moses, and Jesus. How can you still doubt if Mr. Muhammad is from God? What you really should be concerned about is has Mr. Muhammad come in time to save you; and what must you do now to save yourselves.

When Mr. Muhammad says that we must have some of these states, before you flinch and hold up your hands in mock shock, let us look and see if 20 million so-called Negroes deserve such a solution.

If I were to collect the combined wages of everyone in this Yale University Law School auditorium tonight for just one week, I would have plenty of money. If I could work all of you for nothing for just one year I would be extremely rich. Well, what about the millions of black people who worked here in America as your slaves for over 300 years without one payday? What happened to their wages? Who collected the profits, or amassed the fortunes received from their free labor? Facing these unpleasant facts, surely you can easily see now how America became so rich so fast.

How will 20 million so-called Negroes today receive a just compensation? We have hundreds of years back pay that is long overdue, and must be paid sooner or later...or is there to be no such things as justice for your faithful ex-slaves?

The American government has appropriated billions of dollars to pay the Indians for lands taken from their fore-parents by your fore-parents.

Again I say, my friends, let us reason together: surely you will agree that God is more just than your government...yet your government has felt morally and legally obligated to pay billions of dollars to the Indians for the crime committed against them.

What about the 20 million so-called Negroes! If the Indians must be paid for land taken from them, what about the free labor and lives of our fore-parents that were taken from us for over 300 years?

If the white politicians have agreed that the Indians should be paid for their lands...what price or payment will the God of justice demand for 20 million black people who were robbed of our labor, lives, identity, culture, history...and even our human dignity? What will Gods price be? What will Gods solution be? Can America pay Gods price? And, if not, what will be the alternative?

The handwriting is on the wall for America. As America faces crisis after crisis, as America sees dangerous troubles mounting on all sides, and as America stares with stubborn blindness, refusing to read the handwriting on the wall, since her experts have shown they are unable to read its meaning, will America now accept an ambassador from God, a Divine Messenger, a Warner, to read the handwriting for her and tell her what solution she must accept?

Or, will America blindly reject Gods Messenger, and in so doing bring on her own Divine Destruction?

I trust you will weigh well these words.
Dr. Mencher and students. First I want to thank Dr. Mencher for the invitation to speak here this afternoon. And I should start out by pointing out that in the Columbia Law Review I think it was, in December of I think last year, there was an extensive article carried in it about the Muslims and pointing out that there were a group of law students here at this particular campus studying some of the legal aspects of the Muslims and how it would be possible to find some way to stop the spread of their religion according to the Constitution. And whenever you have a University as famous as this in which there are students dedicated to no purpose other than to try and find some constitutional means to stop the spread of an unpopular religion, why that in itself is enough in my introductory remarks to point out why the Muslims in this country are greatly misunderstood.

The press has referred to us as Black Muslims, which we arent. We are black people who are Muslims because we believe in the religion of Islam. When you believe in the religion of Islam, color doesnt play any part. Theres no such thing as a brown Muslim, a red Muslim, yellow Muslim, white Muslim, or black Muslims when you believe in the religion of Islam. But here in the West, the Christian world, where color is the criterion by which a person is measured, in most references that are used to designate people, usually color is one of the main ingredients mentioned. We are Muslims. Our religion is Islam. We believe in Allah. We believe in one God, one creator, one supreme being, who is called by us Allah. And this God is believed in by people in what you call the Moslem world, which covers pretty much all of Asia, Africa, and today, many parts of Latin America.

As Muslims believing in one God, we also believe that this one God has only one religion, and all of the prophets who came forth on this earth spread that one religion. The name of that religion is Islam.
Here in America the so-called Negroes have been cut off from our own forefathers, from our own people, and from our own kind, from our own culture, for nearly four-hundred years. And during the four hundred years weve been cut off from our people back home, we have been exposed to every type of religious philosophy except the religion of Islam, a great deal of time has been taken to keep the religion of Islam away from the ears and the mind of Negroes in this country.

The honorable Elijah Muhammad, we believe, was raised by God from our midst for the express purpose of teaching the religion of Islam to the American so-called Negroes. And those of us who have accepted this religion believe that this religion is the only real cure to what ails our people in this part of the world.

One of the reasons that this religion is the only cure is because we believe that its just the plain naked truth, and one of the causes of our ailments in this part of the world is our lack of exposure to truth during the 400 years that weve been here. We believe that most of what Negroes have been taught in America is lies, deliberately concocted lies, scientifically told lies. And these lies are designed to make Negroes feel inferior and at the same time make white people feel superior. And if anyone has any doubts as to the purposes of the American educational system is designed to do, then all they have to do is examine the general attitudes of white and the general attitudes of blacks, and I think the result will pretty well bear out this statement.

In the religion of Islam, as taught by the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, the main characteristics that one undertakes after having been exposed to it is an awakening. It causes our people to wake up. By wake up, I mean it develops within us racial pride, racial dignity and a strong sense of racial confidence. And this is the missing ingredient that most Negroes find absent whenever they are graduated from the educational system here in America, academic or religious; whereas Mr. Muhammads teaching of Islam restores this racial pride and this racial dignity, this self-respect and confidence in our own kind by restoring our cultural roots, giving us a knowledge of our cultural roots, or I should say connecting us with our roots in the past; and by pointing out to us our historic roots, automatically we can lay hold of them. Just as a tree receives nutrition from its roots, we find that when the so-called Negro in this country is reconverted or turned back to the religion of Islam, it has a tendency to do to us the same thing that the roots of a tree do to those trees.

Also it points out and lends emphasis to the contributions that our people have made to science, to culture, to civilization in the past; whereas the American educational system has completely destroyed all contributions made to science and civilization by dark-skinned people, and lends emphasisofttimes false emphasisto contributions that were made primarily by whites.
And after this wake-up process has been accomplished, the next thing that Mr. Muhammad lends emphasis to in his religious teachings to us is clean-up. Since the general characteristics attributed by sociologists to the so-called Negro community are drunkenness, laziness, welfare problems and things of that sort, today when the Honorable Elijah Muhammad gives us the religion of Islam, immediately the Muslims who accept it turn away from tobacco, from narcotics, alcohol, lying, cheating, stealing, gambling, profanity, boisterousness, most of the this that the critics associate with Negroes.

It develops within us the strong desire to respect our women, protect our women and elevate our women, and also to provide for our women. These are Muslim characteristics. And it gives us a strong respect also for law-enforcement officers and for the law. We are obedient to the law as long as the law is obedient to itself, and we respect the law as long as the law respects itself. And also his teachings have had a strong tendency to rehabilitate men who have gone to prison. In the case of Muslims, seldom does a Muslim ever go to prison for having broken the law. Most Negroes who are in prison who are Muslims became Muslims after going to prison. They went to prison as Christians, and when they get into prison and find that their Christian philosophy or beliefs werent sufficient to turn them away from crime and keep them from behind prison bars, they become very disillusioned. When they hear the teachings of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, usually they accept it. Overnight they change; theyre rehabilitated; theyre reformed and become better persons.

The last step in that process, after wake-up, and clean-up, is stand-up. This religion also gives black people who accept it the desire to start doing something for ourselves instead of sitting around and waiting for the white man to solve our problems and tell us that we are free or do some kind of justice or equality. The Muslims dont feel that it is up to the white men to tell us when our people are really free or when our people are ready for anything. Once we awaken, it is up to us to get what is our right by whatever means necessary to enforce those rights. I might say in this short opening statement that the basic difference between black people in America who are Christians and black people in America who are Muslims is that the black man in America who is a Christian usually identifies himself with America, with all of Americas troubles and problems and be doesnt see himself on the world stage at all.

Usually his scope is very limited. He has never been taught in the American educational system to think of himself beyond the confines of America or see what part he plays in the dark world. His role is limited to America and to the American stage in his own eyes. And therefore on the American stage, which is a white stage, he sees himself as a minority, as the underdog, one against whom the odds are stacked. Usually the black man who is a Christian, when he approaches the problem, he approaches it as an underdog; and he approaches it as a beggar, and he approaches it in a manner where he thinks the white power structure is doing him a favor when they drop crumbs from their table. So he leaves his entire future in the hands of the white man whereas a black man who is a Muslim and who is a follower of the Honorable Elijah Muhammadhis scope isnt limited to the confines of America, but rather he looks at the entire problem in its world context. And as such, he sees that the majority of people of this earth are dark-skinned people or non-white people. And since the majority of people on this earth are non-whites and he himself is non-white, he sees himself in that context; not as a minority on the American stage, but a part of the vast majority of dark-skinned people who outnumber whites on this earth.

But to the Muslim, the white man is just another microscopic minority. And the blacks who accept Islam dont see where whites are doing us any favors when they speak in terms of freedom, justice and equality; nor do we think that it is left up to the white man or should be left up to the white man to make up his mind that Negroes are human beings too, and therefore one of these days pass some kind of legislation that will guarantee to the the Negro rights as human beings.

I hope thats sufficient, and if its not, well try and clarify it later. Thank you.

* * *

Question: Im struck by similarities between ideas preached by the Muslim movement and the ideas of the proponents of negritude, and I wonder if you could say anything about the relationship between the Muslim movement and this movement in Africa with the newly independent African states. Youve sometimes talked about your people going back to where they came from. To what extent is this something thats practical? Is there any dialogue between Africa and the Muslims?

Malcolm X: Mr. Muhammad teaches us that the only solution to this problem that confronts our people in this particular society here, where we are absolutely unwanted, is a departure, an immediate departure, from this unwanted area back to our own homeland where we can live among our own kind in peace and security. And the basic cause of the race problem in this country actually stems from the fact that Negroes are not wanted in this country as anything but chattel or commodity or property which can be exploited politically, economically and otherwise. And as black people in this country wake up and begin to think with their own brain and see the reality of their position in this society, youll find them becoming increasingly disenchanted; and theyll have a tendency to disassociate themselves completely from Americas present as well as from Americas future, which means the only future for a black man who has been exposed to the brutalities and hypocrisies of the American system is a departure back home among our own kind where we can live among our own kind. And if this man that youve named refers to it as negritude, a word which I dont go for too much myself, then its good; because we believe that a white man should be white and a black man should be black. We believe that white people by nature think in terms of what is good for white people first and foremost. We believe that whatever whites do, since they are intellectually maturewhether they are morally mature is another questionbut whenever they become intellectually mature, they think in terms of what is good for white people And everything that they do stems from that particular premisewhat is good for whites. And we believe that black people...and the white man is not wrong for thinking like this. He is applying the first law of nature, which is self-preservation. But by the same token, when the black man becomes truly independent, not only politically and economically but intellectually, we believe that the black man also will then begin to think in terms of whats good for himself collectively as a people first and foremost, which is only natural, and then that leads to something else.

Question: You said that Mr. Elijah Muhammad was raised by God in America. I believe that most Muslims in the East believe that the holy prophet Mohammed was the very first prophet

Malcolm X: Well, if youll recall, I didnt say that Mr. Muhammad was a prophet. Sir, we dont refer to Mr. Muhammad as a prophet. A prophet in my understanding of the word is one who predicts the future, one who says whats coming some day. Were not interested in some day. Were interested in right now. We refer to the Honorable Elijah Muhammad as a messenger who has a message of truth for the black people here in America. Now, when our brothers in the East were taught the religion of Islam and then we, their own people, were kidnapped from the East and brought to this country and held here in bondage for 400 years, our Muslim brothers over there never took the time to come over here and spread the religion of Islam among us or teach us about the religion of Islam, much less teach us anything about our lot. They failed to do this. Those who did come spent most of their time trying to teach Islam to the white man of America who had made us slaves. So theyre not in a position to question the authenticity of anyone who tries to spread the religion of Islam in America among the black people of America. And the bulk of them who come to this countryand I think they number around 2- or 300,000all of them combined have never been successful in converting yet 100 Americans to the religion of Islam. The religion of Islam is a religion of propagation. Its a religion in which, when one accepts it in truth and in sincerity, hes not satisfied unless he is spreading it. This is the nature of Islam; this is the history of Islam. But our brothers over there havent spread Islam in a long time. In fact, they arent even living up to it themselves. So whenever the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, a little black man from Georgia, is able to stand up in his country and get not a hundred or two hundred, but hundreds of thousands of ex-slaves, so-called Negroes, to turn towards Mecca five times a day giving praise to Allah and practicing the principles of the religion of Islam even on a more strict basis than it is practiced in most of the world today, they should give him creditnot question his religious authenticity.

Question: Mr. X, in 1959 when Elijah Muhammad traveled to the Near East he was welcomed by international leaders. At the same time, however, national American leaders of the American Moslem movement, repudiated your group. Can you tell me, since that time has there been any change in that policy? Has there been any interweaving between the two groups?


Malcolm X: Number one, you will not find true Muslims, who are religiously sincere, washing their dirty clothes in public. This is one of the natural characteristics again of Islam. Islam creates brotherhood. It makes Muslims one happy family and whenever members of the same family have a disagreement, they go behind closed doors and iron it out; and then they come out in public with a united front. The Muslims in the Muslim world who welcomed the Honorable Elijah Muhammad upon his trip into the Muslim world in 1959 did so because they realized that he was doing work for the religion of Islam in the West that they themselves combined, with all the resources, were incapable of doing; whereas, on the other hand, you had Muslim groups in this country who are not religiously sincere and who live off the crumbs gain that fall from the table of this so-called power structure in which they live and whatever they say is usually designed to cater to the people who run that power structure or to appease them. So their pronouncements three or four years ago used to be filled with criticism and condemnation of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. But if youll notice in your press, this has decreased recently.

Usually when a Muslim comes here from abroad, reporters will give him a leading question or a loaded question. A reporter will meet that Muslim with the statement that the black Muslims teach hate, theyre against all white people,What do you think of the black Muslims? Why good night, the man cant give but one answer. So this is what this particular segment of the earth has done, and some of our brothers from abroad have come here and fallen victim to it. Rather than coming to us and finding out what it is we stand for and what we are teaching and why, they listen to the enemy of Islam and let the enemy put words in their mouth. So we dont have any sympathy or patience with them either, although actually they dont understand.

Question: How do you feel about the interest that the American Nazi party has shown in your movement?

Malcolm X: I know nothing about the American Nazi party. I think probably all of them can fit in one garden; that is, the practicing Nazis. However, I think that more white people in this country are in sympathy with Naziism than they are with practicing democracy. There are more whites who use little pockets of Nazis as whipping boys actually practice more Naziism and put up with more Naziism than Hitler did in Germany. And I dont think any white is in a moral position to ask me what I think about Nazis in light of the fact youre living in a country which in 1963 permits the bombing of Negro churches and the murder of little innocent and defenseless black childrenwhy, youre not in a position to ask me anything about Naziism. Naziism is practiced by this government. Excuse me for giving it to you so bluntly, but I run into this question every now and then; and it doesnt make me look bad, it makes you look bad. The same thing that Hitler was practicing in Germany is practiced in this country against Negroes and its also practiced against MuslimsNegroes in general and Muslims in particular. They hide behind the fact that Rockwell is supposed to be a Nazi, but Rockwell couldnt do what hes doing and get as much support as hes getting if there werent a large segment of whites in this country who think exactly like Rockwell does only they camouflage their real feelings behind a lot of haughty, pious-sounding phrases like integration, civil rights, and other things.

Question: If you think that our government practices Naziism, what about the efforts of, lets say, the justice department to obtain legislation...about accusing the justice department of not trying to do anything for the Negroes. What about the Kennedy legislative policy?

Malcolm X: What about it?

Question: What about it? What about it?

Malcolm X: The Kennedys dont see any legislation. Kennedy never mentioned any legislation until those Negroes started erupting in Birmingham. As long the dogs were biting black people in Birmingham and King was trying to get the President to send him some troops to protect the victims of police brutality in Birmingham, the President said nothing, the department of justice did nothing. As long as the Negroes were nonviolent, the department of justice did nothing. It was only when the Negroes erupted on Saturday morning and began to retaliate against their brutal attackers that the President came on the television and then started talking about some kind of civil rights legislation that he was going to ask for. He had his back to the wall; he was in a corner; this was the only time he mentioned it. It became a moral issue then. Im not so much influenced by whites who become very moral when someone puts a gun to their head, whether its the President in the white House or just another Rockwell or Wallace. To show you the hypocrisy of the justice department, including the man in the White House, as soon as they felt that the Negro, what they called revolt had died down, they began to water down their efforts to bring out some kind of civil rights legislation. And every day they come out more so and they admit that theres less chance of any civil rights legislation being passed this year. So I dont think that the justice department or anybody else is being true to the situation as it is faced by Negroesagain, especially in light of the fact that, although the justice department couldnt send anybody to Birmingham, Kennedy was ready to send troops into Saigon to protect 2- or 3,000 Americans that didnt even have any business to go over there. And he was ready to send troops into Cuba and other places on this earth. But when it comes to sending troops or police to defend the lives and the property of black people in this country, Its just a whole lot of talk. Nothing ever materializes. And I think white people should realize that Negroes are more aware of this hypocrisy than many whites are willing to admit to themselves.

Question: Sir, on the question of nonviolence, Mr. Williams, the North Carolina Negro now in Cuba, has suggested that American Negroes arm themselves in self- defense. I was wondering if youd like to comment on Mr. Williams views, especially the question of arms.

Malcolm X: Well, I wouldnt comment on Mr. Williams views because I dont know what they are, but I can give you Mr. Muhammads view. Thats what Im here for. I dont represent Robert Williams. Robert Williams is in Cuba. Hes in exile. Evidently he didnt know what he was doing. He should have gone ahead and used what he said he believed in. Muslims who follow the Honorable Elijah Muhammad believe that our people should be intelligent, should obey laws, should carry themselves with respect, but any time anybody puts their hands on us, we should send them straight to the cemeteryno matter what the odds against us are. We should always obey the law; we should respect everyone; we should carry ourselves in an intelligent and respectful and friendly way. But any time anyone comes to put their hands on us, that person should get what be has coming to him. And I dont think theres anything wrong with that because America has always practiced this herself. Ive never read anything in the history of America where Uncle Sam has practiced turning the other cheek. When the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor, America didnt say, Bomb us again. He didnt turn the other cheek. No! She retaliated. She wanted to retaliate against Russia just because Russian missiles were in Cuba.

Anybody whos intelligent is going to defend himself when hes being attacked. And the black people in this country who accept the religion of Islam and become followers of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, no matter what be odds are against uswe dont carry any weapons; we dont arm ourselvesbut we do believe when someone attacks us, we are going to lay down our life right there on the spot, or we are going to lay somebody else's life down beside ours. I hope this clarifies that point

Question: In Mr. Byrds article based on interviews with Elijah Muhammad, he mentions the possibility of political activity force. Could you comment on that?

Malcolm X: Yes. What Mr. Muhammad has in mind is not clear to me. I dont know what his political intentions are. He has not spelled them out. But I might lend emphasis to the fact that the same Herald-Tribune that carried his series, in 1961, in February I think it was, they mentioned that in this country you have approximately 3,000,000 Negroes who vote and 8,000,000 who dont vote. You have 11,000,000 who could vote. They said 2,700,000 do, which in round figures is approximately 3,000,000 who do and 8,000,000 dont. So the question is: who are the type of Negroes who vote? And I think if you study, youll find usually theyre the middle class bourgeois professional type Negro or semi-professional type Negro who take an active part in politics. The masses of black people in this country dont participate in politics. This doesnt mean that theyre politically immature or politically lethargic, but they dont take part in politics because they dont trust the politicians, neither the Negro politician nor the white politician, because most of the Negro politicians are only puppets in the white political machine. They have no voice whatsoever. And when a Negro politician does become independent of the white political machine, usually the press labels him as a racist, an extremist, a demagogue and things like that. You know how they do with probably Adam Clayton Powell. And Powell is one of the only Negroes in this country who has ever shown his ability to be independent of a white political machine. So they label you when you show real independence. Whites dont go along with any black man who is independent of them. As long as a black man will listen to white advice and put himself under white control, then that white man goes along with that black man and calls him a responsible Negro leader, and by that he means that Negro is responsible to him and will listen to him. So these 3,000,000 are in the minority, the upper class Negro; whereas the 8,000,000, the masses who dont participate, theyre the most dangerous element, because if 3,000,000 carry such strategic weight that your Presidential candidates and others will go far out of their way to make love to the 3,000,000, you can imagine what they could have to do if the 8,000,000 who are inactive become active. Why, they would upset the entire political picture in this country.

Those are the facts. Never before this generation has there been a real leader who appealed to the masses other than Marcus Garvey. Marcus Garvey had mass appeal, and he frightened the government and the power structure to death, to the point where they had to get a lot of these Uncle Tom Negroes to join his outfit and get him framed up and sent him to Atlanta penitentiary so they could deport him. The first man to be a leader since Garvey is the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. And those students of political science who are aware of the structure of the Negro community are well aware of the fact that if Mr. Muhammad ever became politically active, youd have a changed picture on the entire political scene of this country. So what his aims are, I dont know.

Question: Sir, I understand that one of the philosophies of the movement is for geographic separation of the races, and I understand also that South Africa recently has established their new policy, which calls for the actual separation into black conclaves. Is there any application of this policy in the United States?

Malcolm X: You cant compare what Mr. Muhammad is asking for with anything thats going on in South Africa. South Africa is South Africa. The apartheid policy is a policy being carried out by the white power structure, which is the minority, against the blacks, who are in the majority And if the white minority thought that the separation of those blacks and whites was going to give the blacks an equal footing, they would be just as much against it as they are now for it. But they figure that they are going to put the black into some kind of segregated society which will still be under their jurisdiction and which they can control. Were not asking anything like that. Mr. Muhammad wants complete separation and independence from this particular political system, economic system that you call America, a system which will enable the black man then to utilize his own dormant talent and know-how and resources to lift himself by his own bootstraps instead of sitting around here as a beggar in this system, dependent upon this system.

Question: Could you forecast how this could happen in the United states? ?

Malcolm X: Number one, Mr. Muhammad isnt saying, Give us part of this country. His solution is, as I think Ive said, is the complete exodus of our people from this country back to our own homeland where we can live among our own people, and that this government should supply us with all of the machinery and tools necessary for us to till the soil back home and develop our own agricultural system, feed, clothe and shelter ourselves, and thereby make our own people an independent people standing on our own feet

And if this government does not want that, then the alternative would be, since we cant get along together in peace on this continent mixed up with each other, to separate this continent geographically and give us an area where theres plenty of rainfall and mineral resources and the machinery and the tools necessary for us to begin the existence of our own independent civilization, society and government there. Then there will be some kind of peace. But other than that, as long as black and white try to stay under the same roof in the same room mixed up together, pretty soon youre going to have some very, very serious trouble because the black man is waking up. And when he wakes up, you cant contain him or trick him. You cant appease him. And tokenism doesnt move him. So if the white society will react as violently as it has only to the tokenism that the Negro is asking for, what do you think white societys reaction will be when the Negro wakes up and begins to ask for the real thing? White society will react violently and then to their shock theyre going to find that Negro society reacting just as violently. Youve forgotten right now that the majority of people on this earth are dark-skinned people, theyre not white people. We represent a minority only in this particular society. But worldwide were a part of the dark majority and well stand on that. And when our brothers over there wake up, they wont continue to be satisfied to come over here and go to the United Nations and berate South Africa for its racism and keeping hush-mouthed on Uncle Sam for his racism. No.

Question: To get what you want, what concrete plans do you have to push that through?

Malcolm X: The honorable Elijah Muhammad, as those of you who are Christians probably will recall in the Bible where Jesus said, Ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free. Well, we believe that. We believe that when the black people In this country are exposed to the truth (thats why I said, wake up) about themselves, their own past, then the worst crime that the white man committed against us will be corrected, because actually the worst crime that the white man today is guilty of is that he has destroyed a people; he has destroyed a human being. 20,000,000 Negroes have ceased to be human in the sight of white society simply because the white system has destroyed all evidences of culture that these people ever had. And when these cultural characteristics have been destroyed, then it is possible for the same system to convict us of having once been savages and cannibals, and then this means that the slave system which we underwent here was a favor to us rather than a crime. And most Negroes actually have fallen for this. But once Elijah Muhammad teaches us the truth about our past and about the cultural, the scientific achievements and contributions of our people in Africa at a time when your own forefathers were crawling around in caves, why immediately this restores within the so-called Negro some kind of racial pride and racial incentive and gives him the ability to stand on his own feet and start thinking with his own brain instead of waiting for a white man to think for him or a white man to do something to solve his problems for him. The truth is sufficient to wake our people up, and once our people wake up, you have a new man, a new people.

It wont be this old handkerchief-head, head-scratcher and knee-knocker that youve been dealing with. Hell be a man wholl meet you with respect as long as you carry yourself with respect. But hell not be a man who will salute you just because your skin is white. those days are over.

Question: Mr. X, I wonder if you can tell us if the Muslims, your people vote, and at the same time could you tell us your opinion of the three men who are already involved in the campaignMr. Goldwater, Mr. Rockefeller, Mr. Kennedy?

Malcolm X: The honorable Elijah Muhammad doesnt teach us to vote. He tells us to wake up. Once a man is awakened intellectually, he can think for himself. He knows whatever is good for himself and then he does that which is good for him, collectively and individually. I should say individually and collectively. Wake up is the first step. Most politicians dont want to wake Negroes up. They want Negroes to register and stay asleep, so they can hitch the Negro vote to their particular wagon. But you never hear any of the Negro leaders talking about waking the Negro up, make him intellectually and politically mature. They just say, Get him to register.And if he registers in the mental condition that he is now, any politician can come along and use him. So Mr. Muhammad says, Wake up. That is, Think for yourself and then do whatever is good for yourself. So the three candidates who are front runningI forget their names, but whoever they are it doesnt make any difference to me. I would list them as foxes and wolves. Goldwater is a wolf. He lets you know where he stands. He doesnt like Negroes. At least all of his pronouncements and behavior give Negroes the impression that hes very vicious and dangerous, a wolf- type character. And as to the others...which one was it?

Question: Rockefeller.

Malcolm X: A fox. Foxes and wolves usually are of the same breed. They belong to the same familyI think its called canine. And the difference is that the wolf when he shows you his teeth, you know that hes your enemy; and the fox, when he shows you his teeth, he appears to be smiling. But no matter which of them you go with, you end up in the dog house. And Negroes in New York State should probably be well acquainted with this because they have no more freedom, justice and equality here than they have anywhere else. The same thing is practiced in New York State as is practiced in Arizona and Mississippi. Only in New York its done in a more subtle manner. Its done with a smile. Its done in a friendly way. But all of the demonstrations that have been taking place here in New York City I think will well bear out what Im saying. I make no distinction between a fox and a wolf other than that distinction. One is a fox and the other is a wolf.

Question: How would you classify President Kennedy?

Malcolm X: Same. A fox. John F. That F stands for fox. Hes undoubtedly more foxier than any of the others because any time a man can become President and be in office three years and do as little for Negroes as he has done despite the fact that Negroes went for him 80% and he can still maintain the friendly image in the mind of Negroes, Ill have to say he's the foxiest of the foxy.

Question: Out of these three candidates, whom would you vote for next year?

Malcolm X: I dont think that if I was cornered by any fox or a wolf, that I would have to take a choice between either one. I dont see any choice between a fox or a wolf. A fox is a fox and a wolf is a wolfto me. Neither one is the lesser of two evils. Both of them are evil. And Negroes, when they become politically mature, I think will realize that you dont have to throw the bullets out of your gun just because you have a gun. Likewise you should wait until you have a target and bring that target down. I think when Negroes become really mature, they wont vote just because they can vote. Sometimes theyll abstain. Ofttimes in a position of abstaining is as effective in its results as an actual vote, as is proved in the UN. You have those who say yes, those who say no, and those who abstain. And those who abstain have just as much weight. And probably the most intelligent thing Negroes could do at this juncture would be to abstain and withhold their vote completely and make both the fox and the wolf fight it out among themselves.

Question: Could you give me some idea of the strength of the black Muslims here in New York City?

Malcolm X: No. I dont know how strong they are. I have no idea whatsoever.

Question: Are there any records of membership?

Malcolm X: No. If there are, I dont have them. Im not the secretary. I have no idea how many Muslims there are in New York or elsewhere. Murray Kempton, writing for the New York Post, said that he has a sneaking suspicion that, he said that he doesnt think there will ever be very many Negro Muslims, but he has a sneaking suspicion that most Negroes have some Muslim in them. I think he was speaking with reason in one breath and with emotion in the next breath. As an intelligent person, his analysis would force him to see that if he were a Negro and he heard what Mr. Muhammad were teaching, he would accept it, but as a white person, he could see it would be against him; so hes hoping that Negroes dont accept it. But I think you would be shocked If you knew how many.

Question: Mr. Muhammad claimed that by 1970, 90% of the Negroes would be converted to Islam. Are you able to state whether its increased in membership?

Malcolm X: Yes, I heard Mr. Muhammad when he made that statement to Lou Lomax when Lomax was a reporter for Mike Wallace; that by 1970, he said that all the Negroes in this country would be resurrected from the grave; and the symbolic language used there only means that they would know the truth, and this truth would wake them upby 1970. And there is every indication that the momentum that is gathering speed as that date arrives. Negroes are waking up, and frankly I believe that if white people knew the degree of speed with which Negroes are waking up, their whole attitude would be a lot different. And the only way you are going to know how fast Negroes are waking up is when you start asking these Uncle Toms, and go out into the Negro community and ask somebody who represents the Negro community.

Question: You said that white men are responsible for the condition that black people are in, and then you said that they should give the black people land, how do you reconcile these two?

Malcolm X: I think its easily reconciled. When you consider that our people were slaves in this country for over 310 years, this was the contribution of free labor, slave labor. Any time that you take the people that are in this classroom right now and take their individual income, individually it would amount to nothing; but collectively it would tip the scalesjust your earning power. Now take the same earning power and multiply that, not weekly, but yearly and you could imagine just what income youd have from the group right here in this small room. When you look at it like that and realize that America didnt have a hundred but had millions of black people in this country whom they could work as animals for over 300 years without having to pay out one dime even in upkeep nor wage, you can see how it was possible for this particular country to become richer than any other country in history faster than any country in history. This is the contribution that the Negro made to the American economic, political and social system.

Now, based on that, the only just compensation today would not be an integrated cup of coffee. Since we have made this contribution to help this country become what it is and now that we are in it we cant get along, and believe me, we cant get along, not as brothers and sistersit will never happenthe only sensible thing that the whites can do to preserve at least part of what you have is to go ahead and give the Negro his share, let him depart and go back to his own homeland and start life among his own people.

I might add, if youll notice I said earlier, this and the alternative and I stopped, because theres got to be a result if either the solution or the alternative doesnt work. Theres got to be a result. Were not going to wait around another five years, ten years or another century to get this race problem solved. Its got to be solved or there wont be any problem to solve.


Question: You havent yet specified whether any particular area where you want to go. Is there any indication of what area you have in mind or whether the people will assent to you or whether youll be able to find the kind of place you want?

Malcolm X: Oh, yes. These are our people back home. What would they look like not accepting us? Although, if youll excuse me for saying this, the colonial system has always been divide and conquer, and the American government has put out the propaganda that our brothers in Africa dont want us, and theyve put out the propaganda among Africans that our people over here dont want them. And when the Africans come to this country theres a mile gap between us and we never knew why. Its this same old divide and conquer, plus the fact that they know that if they keep Negroes thinking that they have no place else to go, then the Negro has to be a beggar over here in America because he thinks theres no other alternative. And most Negro integrationists are nothing but beggars; whereas what Mr. Muhammad is saying is, Let us go. Give us something here that will enable us to solve the problem with the masses.

And if I might take the time to point this out: You see, the difference between what Mr. Muhammad is asking and what the Negro civil rights leaders are asking is this: Mr. Muhammads solution solves the problem for the masses, and it solves it permanently, once and for all. Whereas the Negro civil rights leaderstheir solution will solve the problem for a handful of hand-picked Negroes, and even that solution is temporary, because you cant name one place in America where integration has been brought about other than on a token basis. Wherever it is brought about on a token basis the only ones who receive the benefits of it are the hand-picked Negroes. A handful of hand-picked Negroes. And the masses still remain completely up in arms. So you only make a fool out of yourselves coming up with tokenism which doesnt solve anything. Whereas if you come up with a complete separation and a settlement right now, the problem would be solved once and for all.

Question: You didnt answer my question.

Malcolm X: Answer your question? Well, I dont think it would be wise on our part to specify any geographic or political area on this earth where we would settle other than to say that our people back home will accept us with open arms, and I dont think you should hold it against me for being reluctant to speak on that. Any time a sheep finds itself in a den of wolves and the shepherd comes to take him, what would he look like telling the wolf where hes going?

Question: Sir, would you be in favor, instead of the Negroes withholding their vote, of an all-Negro party perhaps?

Malcolm X: Im sorry I dont know whether I understood your question.

Question: You said that instead of voting for these three men who are running for President that the Negroes ought to withhold their vote. Do you think that instead of this, maybe the Negroes should set up their own all-Negro party in order to get these aims which are political?

Malcolm X: Well, I dont know. You mentioned freedom Now, well, I think they attempt to do that. Youll notice that whenever Negroes attempt to set up an all-Negro anything, the Negro leaders of national stature knock it. Because, you see, Negroes of national stature arent really leaders of the Negro community, and they dont go along with anything thats really designed to solve the problem for the Negro community. Theyre controlled, their salaries are paid by what you call white liberals who are the most dangerous things in America, these things who call themselves white liberals. And so youll never find one of these nationally recognized Negroes going along with anything thats all Negro or anything thats all black because their own position stems from their ability to draw a paycheck, and they dont feel that they can really draw a paycheck in any society thats all black. Theyre more interested in solving their own personal, individual problem than they are the masses of black people. I shouldnt say that we as Muslims couldnt endorse any specific party whether it was all anything. But the very fact that we are Muslims and are black I think pretty well speaks for itself as to which direction our weight would be thrown in if going in that direction was going to bring about a solution to the problem for the masses, not just a few handpicked Negroes. The top Negroes are insufficient to meet the Negros needs.

Question: Why doesnt the black Muslim movement assume the leadership of a party? What is that reason for this?


Malcolm X: What the present Negro leadership in this country is doing will destroy it; theyre riding a tiger. If youll notice, the Negro leaders have never been really militant, never truly militant, nothing that you call Negro leaders. They only became militant when the masses became militant. And then the Negro leaders had to pretend to be militant in order to keep their position in front of the masses. So when they jumped out and pretended to be militant, they began to ride a tiger, which they themselves cant ride nor can they control it. So whenever you find any stirring up by these big Negroes, youll find that theyre stirring up people that they cant control. Theres only one man who can ride that tiger. And they admit it in private, but they wont admit it in public. The tiger will eat them.

Question: Sir, how do you reconcile the fact that you say the Negro is waking up when at a rally in Harlem only a few thousand people attend

Malcolm X: Well, let me answer you in this way: I read in the paper here where the Big Six, with the support of all the news media, TV, radio and the press were going to have a rally at the Polo Grounds. And with all of that support, they only rallied I think 500 people. If you check back, I think youll agree with me that this is what happened. And also whenever Muslims give a rally, if the press says there were 2000 present, you can bet how many were present. The white press acts in concert to play down the effect of Muslims and the influence of Muslims in the so-called Negro community at a local level, a state level and a national level, because the wishful thinking of many of these whites is that most Negroes certainly dont think like Muslims claim they do. So they try and delude themselves. This is one of the most dangerous mistakes this present generation of white people are making. They delude themselves with wishful thinking.

Question: What about the thousand Negroes that marched on Washington?

Malcolm X: I can explain it easily. The march on Washington had reached a complete block and was not getting any reaction at all...originally the idea to march on Washington was brought by the mass of people across the country who were discontent and extremely disenchanted. And at the time that they were talking about marching on Washingtonif you go back and check all the press reportsWilkins and the national leaders werent involved in it at all: those Big Six werent involved in it at all. It was talked about developing into such an uncontrollable thing that you will recall President Kennedy called in Wilkins and I think Randolph and one of the others and told them to call it off. And then the President was told that they couldnt call it off because they werent the ones that had started it, then shortly after that, Wilkins and them returned to New York and a meeting was held at the Carleton Hotel in downtown New York, the hotel that Kennedy stays at, I think owned by his family or somebody close to him.

This meeting was called by a philanthropic society called the Foundation which is he headed by Stephen Courier, and Stephen Courier had these Negro leaders where they were destroying themselves by fighting each other and that we should unite into what they called the united civil rights leadership committeesomething like that. And once they formed this thingit was supposed to be for fund-raising purposes, Courier maneuvered Young into the chairmanship of it and he became the Co-Chairman. And this particular organization was then used to represent and control and influence all the civil rights movement. The first step was to take over the march on Washington. And the Big Six were projected by the news media as the leaders of the march, as being in control of the march. And as soon as the public accepted them or identified them as being inseparable with the march image, their next step was to invite Walter Reuther, a rabbi, a priest and a preacher to join; the same white clique that put Kennedy in power in Washington, D.C. joined the march in Washington because when Kennedy himself found that he couldnt stop it, fox that he is, he joined it. He endorsed it; he welcomed it, and said, Come on to Washington. And he got his friends to join it. And when they joined it, they weakened it. It became nothing. Its like when you have a black cup of coffee thats too strong to drink, you integrate it with cream; or you pour cream in it, and as you pour the cream in it, it cools down and it weakens it, you eventually dont have the same substance that you started out with. The march on Washington turned out the same way. It shows the shrewd political reassuring and trickery of this group that is running the country right now. They joined it. And they put so many whites in it that it lost its militancy; it lost its flavor; it lost its anger.

They controlled it completely and they controlled it lock, stock and barrel to the point where the government was the one that told those Negroes what time to leave town, when to arrive, where they could march, and what they could say, what they could sing, and told them they better leave town by sundown. This was your march on Washington. Most of the real militant Negroes havent been to Washington yet. As soon as the whites took it over they stayed away from it. The only ones who really believe that the March on Washington accomplished anything are a handful of bourgeois Negroes and a lot of wishful thinking whites. It was controlled by whites, not by Negroes. And it benefitted nothing.

To show you the extent to which it was worthless, within two weeks after it was over they bombed a church down in Birmingham, murdered four little girls, shot two more little black boys in the back; and Kennedy had things under control to the extent where he didnt even send any help and sent a football coach down there to... Negroes are just a football team...and he sent his head coach down there to make sure that things didnt get out of hand. So dont mention the march on Washington. It was a farce, and it didnt impress anybody except those who wanted to be impressed by it even before it took place.

I want to thank you for the invitation and I hope that my blunt speaking wont be taken by you as a manner of disrespect. This is not the case. I know that you invited me here to speak what I think, not just what you want to hear. Some of the others come and tell you what you want to bear.
Malcolm X: With regard to The Saturday Evening Post article, its just about what you would expect from a nationally circulated magazine that is writing about a group of black people not under the influence or control of the white man. To me the magazine article was, by and large, a great deal of propaganda. The very fact that it is named Merchants of Hate gives a clue to the purpose or objective that the people who were responsible for the article had in mind. I think that the white man has a great deal of nerve to refer to any black people as merchants of hate in the face of the hell that black people have caught in this country at the hands of the white man, even at a time when the whites are admitting that they have brutalized black people for four hundred years. They kidnapped us and brought us here; they deprived us of our rights; they made us slaves; they sold our people from one plantation to another, from one auction block to another. And even right now, 1963, they have to confess they are still depriving the black people here in America, not only of civil rights, but even of human rights. And behind all of this mistreatment and abuse that whites have inflicted upon the black people in this country, again I say, I think that a white man in a magazine published by white people has a whole lot of nerve charging black people with teaching some kind of hate about them. If black people in this country behind the deeds they have experienced at the hands of the white man dont hate him because of what they have wasting his time trying to teach someone hate behind that. The Honorable Elijah Muhammad doesnt teach hate, he teaches black people to love each other.

Moderator: Was there anything in that article, Malcolm X, relative to the Muslims that was true?

Malcolm X: There could have been. I think when it says that the Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us to reform ourselves of the vices and evils of this society, drunkenness, dope addiction, how to work and provide a living for our family, take care of our children and our wiveswhen it pointed out these aspects it was speaking truth, but this is a thing that black people have to guard against. Oftentimes a propagandist who is shrewd will tell just enough truth to make you believe that he is being objective and to get you to listen and then he starts injecting the negative side, and this is where we become resentful.

Moderator: They did make some mention in the article, however, of the growing strength of the Black Muslims.

Malcolm X: Not because they wanted to but because they had to. I think the white man has to face the fact that black people in this country are tired of sitting around waiting for the white man to make up his mind that we are human beings. Therefore, the type of so-called Negro leadership that represents this hat-in-hand, patient, wait-another-hundred-years approach, that type of leadership is losing its grip on the mind of the masses of people. So when a man like the Honorable Elijah Muhammad steps forth in the midst of the so-called Negroes and calls it just like it is, and shows the black people that we dont have to compromise with the white man because we are rightright is on our sideand when right is on your side, and when what a man is doing to you is wrong, you dont have to sit around and give him another hundred years to get his house in order. It is this type of approach that the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is using that makes the masses of black people see that he is the man for them. And it is also helping his growth.

Moderator: Mention was made in the article of the business prospects, of progress made by the Muslims, and in so doing accusations were made in the article that most of the businesses of the Black Muslims are very small neighborhood businesses. Is that true?

Malcolm X: Well, sir, when the white man himself was starting out his businesses in this country they all started out as neighborhood businesses. Woolworth started out with one store and over the years he has developed a chain into a tremendous economic enterprise. Sears, Roebuckall of your big chain businesses or your industries that the white man has today were started as small businesses. Any business that you can point out started out small, and this is where the Negro has made his mistake. He wants to start out right now exactly as the white man is. He doesnt realize that you have to start out small and develop into that which you ultimately will become. And the Honorable Elijah Muhammad has actually showed his business ingenuity by showing how to start out small and develop our businessesmake them growand then our business ability grows right along with that business. And there is nothing wrong with that. And also that article did point out the fact that most of the businesses arent owned by the Nation of Islam or the Muslim group per se, but rather most of the businesses are owned by the individual Muslims, and this is true. The Honorable Elijah Muhammad encourages every so-called Negro that respects the religion of Islam to stand on his own two feet and start doing something for himself. So the money that we used to throw away when we were Christiansnightclubbing and drinking and smoking and participating in these other acts of immoralitythe money that we save when we become Muslimswe channel it into these small business enterprises and try to develop them to where they can provide some job opportunities for the rest of our people. And I can cite a good example in New York where we have one particular brother who, when he was a Christian, was a drunkard. He was a mechanic. He used to work for the white man. And when he came to Muhammads Mosque in New York he immediately stopped drinking and he started saving his money and he opened up a little two-by-four, or two-bit, garage in a store on 115th Street, and within three or four years he had saved up enough money to buy himself a home on Long Island plus expand his small business into a five-story garage, where he now employs fifty or so persons. Which means he is now in a position to create employment for Negroes. And he has done this only since becoming a Muslim. He is only an example of what the Honorable Elijah Muhammad has taught black men to do across the country. Instead of begging the white man for what he has, he says we should get together and start doing something for ourselves. As long as a lot of these Negroes want to continue to beg from the white man and sit around and wait for the crumbs to fall from the white mans table, they dont like what Mr. Muhammad is forcing them to do: stand on their own two feet. So they slip up to the white man and whisper in his ear and make the white man thinkthe gullible white man thinkthat the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is teaching hate and trying to develop some kind of an army to overthrow the white man. And as long as the white man listens to that type of Negro he will end up overthrowing himself.

Moderator: Malcolm, I understand that you were at the Irvine Auditorium at the University of Pennsylvania today as a guest of the youth chapter of the NAACP and the report that I received was that you had better than three thousand people out there, with a number of people standing outside who were not able to gain entrance. Is that true?

Malcolm X: That is correct.

Moderator: I am wondering what your subject was and I what you talked about out there.

Malcolm X: Well, before I tell you the subject I want to comment on that crowd. Youll find that this is a pattern that we run into across the country. Wherever a Muslim makes an appearance and gives a lecture, no matter what type of crowd comes out, even a capacity crowd, very seldom will you read too much about it in the press. Very seldom will you get any indication from the press that the people in that city or in that community or in that college or in that university are showing any genuine interest in what the Muslim has to say. But when an integrationist like King or someone else comes into the city, if he talks to five people this will be blown up in the press and it will be made to appear that this is the man who represents the black masses, and that all of the black masses endorse the type of peaceful-suffering, hat-in-hand, tongue-in-cheek doctrine that is usually displayed on those occasions. So basically one of the reasons why you never hear too much about occasions like this is because of that fact. Now, my subject today dealt with primarily two different Negroes: the old Negro and the new Negro.

Moderator: Will you tell us something about it?

Malcolm X: I will. This is the thing that whites need to be made aware of, that there is an old Negro and a new Negro. The old Negro is the one that the white man is familiar with. The new Negro is the one that has resulted from the teachings of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, and the whites in this country are not too familiar with this type. Back in slavery they also had two types, and to understand the types today you have to understand the two types that existed during slavery. During slavery, historians agree, there were what were known as the house Negro and the field Negro. The house Negro was the one who lived in the masters house, ate the masters food, at the masters table usuallyafter the master had finished with it. He dressed like the master, which means he wore the same type of clothing that the master did, but usually it was clothing handed down to him by the master. He identified the masters house as his own. If the master said, We have a fine house here, the house Negro would say, Yes, our house is a fine house. Whenever the master said, We, he said, We. If the master said, We have good food on our table, the house Negro would chime in and say, Yes, we have plenty of food, boss, on our table. The house Negro would also identify himself so closely with his master that when the master was sick the house Negro would say, Whats the matter, boss, wes sick? When the master was sick he was sick. If the masters house caught on fire the house Negro would fight harder to put the flames out or keep the flames from enveloping the masters house than the master would himself. If someone were to come to the...

Moderator: He would naturally say, Wes sick, because the master was sick?

Malcolm X: Oh yes, he would say, Wes sick or Wes in trouble. If the master was in trouble, he would say, Boss, we is sure in trouble.

Moderator: Well, I can understand where he might be in trouble if the master was in trouble, but I cant understand how he could be sick if the master was sick!

Malcolm X: Oh, yes. This type of Negro loved the master so muchhe never felt pain for himself; he only was in pain when his master was in pain. And this is very important to understand because you cannot understand the present-day twentieth century house Negro or twentieth century Uncle Tom until you have a real understanding of the Uncle Tom who lived on the plantation before the Emancipation Proclamation. And that type of Negro never identified himself with the other slaves. He always thought he was above the field Negroes. The field Negroes were the masses. The house Negroes were the minority whereas the field Negroes were in the majority.

Now, sir, if someone came to that house Negro and said, Lets separate, lets run, the house Negro would look at that person like he was crazy and tell him, Run where? How would I live, how would I sleep if I leave my masters house? How would I eat if my master didnt feed me? How would I clothe myself if my master wasnt here to give me some clothes? Well, thats the house Negro. Now you have the other type of Negrothe field Negro. The field Negro was the one who really caught hell. He was the one who was dissatisfied. He was the one who was oppressed. He was the one who was downtrodden and exploited most. He was the one who felt the brunt of the masters whip, the lash of the masters whipand he hated his master. If his master got sick, he didnt say, Are we sick? He prayed that his master would die. If his masters house caught on fire he prayed for a strong wind to come up and burn the plantation down. He never identified himself with his master in any way whatsoever. And if someone came to that Negro, that field Negro, that mass element, and said, Lets go, lets separate, lets leave the master and strike out on our own, he wouldnt even ask where. He would leave. He wouldnt even ask you how. He would leave. He wouldnt ask you any questions at all. As soon as you said, Come on, lets go, hed be gone.

Now just as you have the house Negro and the field Negro a hundred years ago, in America today you have a house Negro and a field Negro. You have the modern counterpart of that slavery-time Uncle Tom, only the one today is a twentieth century Uncle Tom. He doesnt wear a handkerchief around his head, sir. He wears a top hat. He speaks with a Harvard accent or a Howard accent. Sometimes he is a lawyer or a judge or a doctor or he is an ambassador to the UN. He represents the government in all the international conferences. He runs to the Congo and tries to settle differences there, but he cant go to Mississippi and settle differences that his own people are confronted with in the face of these Mississippi southerners. This is the twentieth-century house Negro. He wants to live with his master. He wants to force his way into his masters neighborhood. He wants to force his way into his masters schools. He wants to force his way into his masters industry. He identifies himself with his master so much that when his master says, Our society, he says, Yes boss, our society. When his master says, Our army, our armed forces, or Our astronauts are floating around the earth, he says, Yes. Now here is a Negro, mind you, talking about his astronauts floating around in space someplace or talking about his industry out here called General Motors or talking about his mayor in City Hall or his President in the White House. Every time the white man says, We that type of Negro says, Yes, we. Now when he hears the white man say how rich we are, that Negro runs around talking about how rich we are, how enlightened we are, how educated we are, or this is the free world or this is a free country, and at the same time he is begging the white man for civil rights and integration and all that kind of stuff he doesnt have. He is a twentieth century Uncle Tom. He is a house Negro. He is no different from that house Negro during slavery other than that he is living in the twentieth century. But he identifies himself with the white man. He is never sick until the white man is sick. If you attack the white man, that Negro will open up his mouth to defend the white man better than the white man can defend himself.

Now then, you have the masses of black people in this country who are the offshoot of the field Negro, during slavery. They are the masses. They are the ones who are jobless. They are the last hired and the first fired. They are the ones who are forced to live in the ghetto and the slum. They are the ones who are not allowed to integrate. They are not the handpicked Negroes who benefit from token integration. They are not the bourgeoisie who get the crumbs that fall from the white mans table. They are not the ones who can slip into the White House or these big hotels when the doors are opened up. These are the ones who still are forced to live in the ghetto or forced to live in the slum or forced to get a third-rate education or forced to work in the worst form of job. They benefit in no way, shape, or form whatsoever from this thing that is called democracy. And that type of Negrowhen you come to himfield Negro, this mass level type of so-called Negroand tell him, Lets separate, he doesnt ask you anything about Where shall we go? He doesnt question Mr. Muhammads method of bringing about separation. He just says, OK, lets separate. We are catching hell in this system we are in now. Lets separate. He has the same reaction to what the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is teaching today that the field Negroes would have if a man came during slavery and told those slaves, Come on, lets go.

This was emphasized at the University of Pennsylvania today, to make the white people see that they are dealing with two different types of Negro. This integrationist Negro is the one who doesnt want to be blackhe is ashamed to be blackand he knows that he cant be white. So he calls himself a Negro an American Negrowhich means he is neither black nor white. He doesnt want to be black and cant be white, so he is called a Negro. And since he is living in this American society he is always seeking a role for himself on the American stage. And since he knows that America is a white country and all of the economy, the politics, the civic life of America is controlled by the white manthe whole stage is controlled by the white manwhenever he sees himself on the American stage, he sees himself as a minority in the company of a white majority. So he is the underdog, and as an underdog he regards himself as a minority. He adopts the beggar rolethe role of a beggar. And for everything that type of Negro seeks for himself he takes a begging attitude, a condescending attitude. So also, sir, he never looks at himself on the world stage. Usually his knowledge is limited to right here, to America, and he thinks of himself as an American in the American context which always keeps him in the role of a minority. But now when it comes to the international stage he cant see it. He is not interested in a role on the international stage. He only wants a minority role in America.

But there is another type of Negro on the scene. This type doesnt call himself a Negro. He calls himself a black man. He doesnt make any apology for his black skin. He doesnt make any apology for being in America because he knows he was brought here forcibly by the white man. Its the white mans fault that he is here. Its the white man who created the problem here in America that they call a race problem. This type of black man sees that. So he doesnt apologize for being here; he doesnt apologize for the problem that his presence confronts the white man with. He doesnt walk around bragging that he is an American or that he wants to be a part of the American society. This particular type of black man has been exposed to the teachings of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, and having been exposed to the teachings of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad his thinking is international. He sees the world. He doesnt see America. He sees the entire world. And when he sees the world he sees that the majority of people on this earth are dark people and these dark people outnumber the whites. So he doesnt think of himself as a minority, but he thinks of himself as part of this vast dark majority who outnumber the whites, and therefore he doesnt have to beg the white man for anything. He takes his role on the international stage and thats not the role of a beggar, thats the role that he was automatically born for.

While I was at the University of Pennsylvania this afternoon, or this evening, I was trying to point out to them, to make them see the importance of recognizing the fact that there are two different types of Negroes in America today, and as long as they try and do business, we might say, only with this integrationist-type Negro, the problem can never be solved. We should take into consideration the fact that the Attorney General, Robert Kennedy, repeatedly, recently, has been pointing out that Americas number one problem, domestic problem, is the race problem, and that failure to solve this problem is destroying Americas image among the dark masses of Africa, Asia, and Latin America. Also, failure to solve this problem has serious repercussions on the American economy, as well as upon Americas foreign policy. Even a recent speech by the governor of North Carolina lends added emphasis to the importance of solving this serious race problem. North Carolina is a state where the so-called Negro has been brutalized from the time he was brought there, and even the governor of that state realizes the importance of this race problem. So much so that that governor was on television recently, pointing out to the people of America the importance of doing something to solve this problem. And then last week an interfaith religious conference of Protestant, Catholic, and Jewish groups which was held in Chicago, dealing with the race problem, that conference also broke up. And it broke up with the problems of racism still unsolved. In fact when one reads the results of that religious conference one has to agree that it succeeded only in highlighting their inability to eliminate white racism from their own churches and synagogues. So I was pointing out there at the University of Pennsylvania that no group or council or conference would ever solve the race problem until they first recognized and included the Honorable Elijah Muhammad as an active participant in all of their discussions and in all of their plans.

Why? Because the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is the only black man in America who can speak for the oppressed and dissatisfied black masses who are impatient and tired of sitting around and waiting for the white man to make up his mind to do something to solve this problem. Plus the fact that these other so-called Negro leaders that are usually up in the white mans face are Negroes whom the white man himself has set up as leaders, and they dont represent any of the black masses. They dont speak for the dissatisfied black people or the impatient black people. Usually they know exactly what the white man wants to hear them say, and they say it in the exact manner that the white man expects them to say it. And by listening to these Negroes the problem never gets solved, it only gets worse. Also, racial unrest never occurs among the satisfied, bourgeois class of Negroes. They can easily be appeased and controlled and influenced just by continuing to drop crumbs on their tablethe crumbs of tokenism. And this type of Negro that the so-called Negro leadership represents is a type that can be appeased and can be controlled with the crumbs of token integration. But the racial explosions never take place among that type. Racial explosions always erupt among the oppressed, dissatisfied black masses, and the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is the only black man today that is speaking out in behalf of the black masses.

I read out there at the University of Pennsylvania an article that was in the Detroit News quoting a chaplain, Rev. Malcolm Boyd, a white Episcopalian chaplain at Wayne State University who pointed out that the conference in Chicagothe Interfaith Conference in Chicagowas a failure. In the Detroit News he said, and I quote him: Although 650 leaders of American churches have gathered here, nothing has been brought out and nothing ever will unless the basic ideas of such a gathering as this are changed. The conference centered on the failure of religion to aid racial integration. Now Rev. Boyd pointed out, and again I quote: My chief criticism was of the speakers selected to address the conference. They are leaders in the field of religion, highly articulate and persuasive, but they are not saying anything new or anything that will help solve the real problem for us.

Rev. Boyd believes that the conference might have accomplished much good if the speakers had included a white supremacist and a Negro race leader, preferably a top man in the American Black Muslim movement. And he went on to say, and I quote: A debate between them (meaning this white racist and a Black Muslim) would undoubtedly be bitter, but it would accomplish one thing: it would get some of the real issues out into the open. In this conference we have not done that. The money spent to bring these people here has been wasted. We have done nothing to solve the race problem either in our churches or in our communities. Now the statements from this element that attended this interfaith conference on religion in Chicago have not been given wide coverage in the press. The press has used its outlet or its ability to reach the public to make the public think that an honest effort was put forth out there to listen to the gripes and grievances of the dissatisfied Negroes or to solve the problem. But those who attended admit, and the current Jet magazine points out, that the conference was a failure. So all of this was put forth at the University of Pennsylvania, and it was pointed out to them that the only way the white man can solve his problem is to realize the existence of two different, distinct types of Negroes. This is the old type and the new type: that old type who is the Uncle Tom and wants to continue to beg white people to accept him or to force himself into the white society; then this new type of black man who wants to think for himself, speak for himself, stand on his own feet, and walk for himself. This type is following the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. If he is not an outright follower of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad he is in sympathy with the teachings of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, and he believes that the only way our problem can be solved is that, instead of sitting around waiting for the white man to solve it, the black people have to come together. We have to forget our differences. We have to forget our religious differences, our economic differences, our social differences. We have to submerge our differences and get together behind the door and formulate some kind of plan, come to some kind of conclusions of what we can do to solve the problem of our ever increasing number of black people across the nation. And it was also pointed out to the students at the University of Pennsylvania this afternoon that the only way they can understand the thinking of this new type of black man is to realize what he sees when he opens his eyes and looks around this world. And this new type of black man realizes that, in the past, dark mankind was ruled by white mankind. This is a fact. Right up until today, recent history, black, brown, red, and yellow man was ruled by the white manwhich means European colonialism. This is what they call it, but in essence European colonialism meant that the white man was ruling the black, brown, red, and yellow people of this earthwhich is, in reality, white supremacy. Now these same dark people who were ruled by the European minority were actually in the majority. It means that in the past the European minority, the white minority, was able to come together both by hook and by crook and rule the dark majority by practicing divide and conquer.

When the black, brown, red, and yellow man of Africa and Asia realized what was going on, they had a conference in Indonesia which has come to be known as the Bandung Conference. And what they did at that Bandung Conference actually changed the course of history. They had many differences: they had religious differences, economic differences, all types of differences. But at the Bandung Conference the black, brown, red, and yellow man agreed to submerge their differences and come together against the common enemy, the thing that all of them had in common: that they were all being exploited by the white man, they were all being oppressed by the white man. They called him European, but actually he was a white man.

So once they reached a conclusion that they had oppression in common, exploitation in common, they were able to identify a common enemy, and this enabled them to unite against the common enemy; and out of this grew what we today know as the African-Asian-Arab bloc. They have differences among themselves, yet they work together. Their working unity enabled them to free the dark nations of Africa. The fast emerging independence of the nations in Africa has taken place since the Bandung Conference. As these nations in Africa began to get their independence and come into the United Nations they had a vote, they had a voice, and they soon were able to outvote the white man, outvote the European, outvote the colonial powers. And by being able to outvote the colonial powers their vote was sufficient to produce a power that forced the people of Europe to turn loose the black man in Tanganyika, the black man in the Congo, the black man in what we today know as the former French West African territories. All of this stems from the unity of the black, brown, red, and yellow man in the United Nations. It created a new era. It created a new world. And it created a situation where the only people who were able to sit at the helm of the United Nations were no longer white or European or Christian or in the person of Trygve Lie or Dag Hammarskjold or some of the others. Right after the black man, brown man, red man, yellow man agreed to submerge their differences and come together in unity, their unified force was sufficient to make it almost impossible today for a white man to be elected to the helm of the United Nations or for a Christian to be elected to the helm of the United Nations or for a European to be elected to the helm of the United Nations. Everyone that you see now sitting in the top seat of authority in the UN is either an African, an Asian, or an Arab, or he is either a Hindu, a Buddhist, or a Muslim. And all of this is the result of the ability of these black, brown, red, and yellow people to forget their little differences and come together against the common foe, against the common enemy, the oppressor.

And this is a good example that the black people in America can copy if we want to bring about freedom, justice, equality, and human dignity of the black people in this country. It was also pointed out today at the University of Pennsylvania that the Honorable Elijah Muhammads program is designed to make black, brown, red, and yellow people here in America, the so-called Negro, forget our differences. Any differences that we have we should take them behind the door, or any argument that we want to engage in among ourselves should be done behind the door. Instead, we need to present a common front against a common enemy, and the common enemy of the black, brown, red, and yellow man is anyone standing in the way of our freedom. Anyone standing in the way of our justice or equality. Anyone who deprives the black man in America of civil rights is an enemy to the black man. Anyone who deprives the black man of citizenship in America is an enemy to the black man. And when the black people in this country learn how to recognize the enemy, the common enemy, then the black people can get together in unity and harmony and do whatever is necessary to solve our own problems. We wont be sitting around here waiting for the white man to issue some kind of emancipation proclamation. We wont be waiting for the Senate or Congress. We wont be waiting for any Supreme Court. Our unity will be sufficient to bring about human dignity, to bring about freedom, justice, and equality, and to bring about whatever the black man needs to enable him to stand on his own feet like a man.

It was also pointed out to them, so they wouldnt think hard of me in saying that their world was coming to an end, that their world was decreasing, that their power was on the downgrade, that they were losing out all over the world I reminded them of a speech that was made by Prime Minister Macmillan on April 26, 1962, at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York City, to the leading publishers and editors of America, at which time Prime Minister Macmillan himself pointed out that in his own lifetime a change, a new world, has come into existence. He said that when he was a boy the world was a white world. Britains power extended so far across this planet that they used to brag that the sun would never set on the British Empire. In Macmillans own lifetime, the power of the Englishman, the white man in England, has decreased so much, or the British Empire has decreased so much, that today when the sun rises you can hardly find the British Empire. And this is all symbolic of the decrease in power that the white man has suffered just in recent years. Just as Britain has dwindled down to nothing in prestige and influence in the face of the rising dark nations of this earth, all of your white nations have done the same thing.

France has dwindled down to nothing. She has lost her possessions in Asia and, after she lost her possessions in Asia, I think called Indo-China, it affected her economy so much that she didnt have enough strength, economic strength, to keep in existence an army large enough to dominate the large West African territories. She had to turn them loose, and finally she had to turn Algeria loose, I just in our own lifetime, just in this present generation. Not only did this happen to England and France, but the Netherlands had to give up Indonesia. And as soon as the Netherlands turned loose the brown mans lands in Indonesia, the economy of the Netherlands dwindled down so that you hardly hear of the Dutch. You hardly hear of Belgium. Belgium used to be a power on this earth, as I long as she could dictate to the black people in the Congo. But as soon as Belgium had to turn loose the Congolese, within a matter of months, the loss of the free and cheap mineral resources that the white man from Belgium in Europe was getting from the black mans lands in Africa affected the Belgium economy so much they had a collapse in the Belgium government. And all of this is a pattern that the white mans whole world, his whole kingdom, has had to face up to in recent times, during your and my generation. So I pointed these things out to the white students at the University of Pennsylvania so that they could see themselves that their world is shrinking, that their world is coming to an end. And the thing that is bringing about an end to their world is the awakening of the dark world. As the dark world awakens, the dark world is rising. And as the dark world rises and increases, the power of the white world decreases. So when the Honorable Elijah Muhammad mentions to us, the so-called Negroes here in America, that we are living at the end of the world, all that means is that we are living at the end of the white world. When he says we are living at the end of time, all that means is that we are living at the end of the white mans time. The time that the white man could exercise unilateral and dictatorial power over the destiny of black people, brown people, red people, and yellow people on this earth has come to an end. And when the Honorable Elijah Muhammad says this they call him a black supremacist, they call him a racist, while at the same time in the halls of the United Nations Prime Minister Macmillan and all of the international diplomats are getting on the podium at the UN and crying the blues because they can see the handwriting on the wall.

And just like it took Daniel in Babylon to read the handwriting on the wall for that slave master or the descendants of Nebuchadnezzar, it takes the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, a little ex-slave here in America, to stand up here in this House of Bondage today and read the handwriting on the wall and let the white man know that his time is up, that his days are numbered, that he has been weighed in the balance and all of the seeds of injustice that he has sown in the past are coming home to plague him today. All of the injustices committed by past generations of whites the present generation of Englishmen is suffering because it breaks them up to see themselves lose their empire. But still they are losing their empire because of seeds sown by their own foreparents in England and the present generation of Englishmen has to face that as a fact. The seeds of their forefathers have come home to plague this generation of Englishmen that live on this earth today.

Likewise, here in America, what has the American white man got to realize? That a crime was committed against the so-called Negro. And I think that the most important thing that was pointed out to the students of the University of Pennsylvania today was that a crime was committed against the so-called American Negro when our people were brought here. And today the white man, not realizing, not being capable of facing up to the fact, that a crime was actually committed, thinks he is doing the so-called Negro a favor when he opens the door to freedom. And I pointed out to the students: when someone sticks a knife into my back nine inches and then pulls it out six inches they havent done me any favor. And if they pull that knife which they stuck in my back all the way out they still have not done me any favor. They should not have stabbed me in the back in the first place. Likewise, it was pointed out to them that when you take a man and frame him up, an innocent man and frame him up, and put him in prisonand because he rebels against this illegal and unjust framing and imprisonment he then is placed in solitary confinement within the prison to keep him from rebelling against the laws of the penal institutionafter his spirit is broken in solitary confinementwhy, the warden isnt doing that man any favor by taking him out of solitary confinement and then giving him more freedom within the confines of the prison wall. He shouldnt be imprisoned in the first place. And if they break down the prison walls completely and let that man out they still arent doing that man any favor because they imprisoned him illegally and unjustly in the first place.

Now the Honorable Elijah Muhammad says that the white man captured millions of black people and brought us into prison, a prison house called America. They called it slavery; it was prison. And during the slavery or imprisonment of the black man in this country they inflicted the most extreme form of brutality against us to break our spirit, to break our will to resist, to destroy our manhood, to take the bone out of our back, to destroy our backbone. And after destroying our will, making us docile and humble, so that today we will turn the other cheek to those who are brutalizing us, after they did all of this to us for 310 years, then they come up with some so- called Emancipation Proclamation supposedly bringing us out of what we would call solitary confinement and giving us more freedom here within the prison walls of America.

And today the white man actually runs around here thinking he is doing the black people a favor because he gives us a little degree of freedom or justice or equality, or because he lets another one or two or three Negroes go to school with white people. The white man has the audacity to imply that he is doing black people a favor. What the white man should be made to realize is that his forefathers committed a crime by bringing our people here to this country. They committed a crime when they murdered our people throughout America. They committed a crime when they sold us from one plantation to another plantation like chattel or like merchandise or like common property. This was a crime and all of those crimes that were committed during the 310 years against the black people in this country are the crimes that have come home to roost today on this present generation of whites. And the only black man in America, the only black leader in America, the only black spokesman in America who will sit down and talk to the white man like a man, like a black man to a white man, and spell it out the way it is, is the Honorable Elijah Muhammad.

If the white man wants to solve his problem, if the white man wants to solve the race problem, if the white man wants to eliminate racial tension, then the white man should do the same thing that Pharaoh did who was the ruler of the House of Bondage in the days of Egypt. He was not able to solve his problem until he sat down and talked with Moses. Nebuchadnezzar wasnt able to solve his problems until he sat down and talked with Daniel. And today, here in America, this white man will never solve his problems until he sits down and talks with the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, and the Honorable Elijah Muhammad will tell him the same thing that Moses told Pharaoh: Let my people go. Not let my people integrate with you, but let my people separate from you. Let us go to ourselves and solve our own problems and build up some kind of society, some system, some kind of agricultural system, so that we can feed and clothe and shelter our own people, an economic system so that we can provide the necessities of life for our own people, and have our own government, our own flag, our own everything. The white man can stay to himself and we can stay to ourselves. Perhaps then we can get some kind of solution to the problem.

But theyll never solve the problem listening to these handpicked, Uncle Tom, bourgeois, upper-class Negroes whose only desire is to sit down in the white mans house or in the white mans neighborhood or in the white mans school. Some of them now even insist upon dying and being buried in the white mans cemetery. Thats foolish, and the masses of black people in this country dont think that this in anyway is a solution to our problem.

So all of these things were pointed out to the students of the University of Pennsylvania this afternoon, not with any animosity or any hostility but in the language of frankness. And I think they listened very objectively and very intelligently. Sometimes there were little temporary disturbances by someI guess they were white segregationists, I dont know whether they were segregationists or integrationistswho were sitting up in one part of the balcony. They were trying to do a little heckling, but it is impossible for a white man to heckle a Muslim. There is nothing that he can come up with that surprises a Muslim or in any way phases a Muslim. We are not interested in his heckling. All we are interested in is spelling out the problem. And if he is man enough to listen then perhaps he will get a better understanding of it.

So in this lecture this afternoon at the University of Pennsylvania, as well as the lecture at Michigan State University on Wednesday, our primary objective and purpose was to show the white man that just dealing with the integrationist-minded Negro will never solve the problem If you read this weeks Jet, the one that is on the newsstand right now, the observers who attended this interfaith religious conference in Chicago all agreed that it was impossible for the type of Negro leadership that was represented there to sit down and hold any kind of discussion with whites and really get to the root, to the nitty-gritty of the problem. The only way that the root of the problem can be gotten to is to have someone in those conferences who represents the masses.

You read about the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. One of the things thats always pointed out even by his critics is that the intellectual Negro doesnt follow Mr. Muhammad; they say that the educated Negro doesnt follow Mr. Muhammad; they say that the Negro with the high income bracket doesnt follow the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. What they always emphasize is that the only Negroes that follow Muhammad are those who dont have too much education, those who are oppressed, unemployed, and dissatisfied. Well, what they are doing right there, then, is admitting that it is the masses who follow the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, because the masses of black people in this country are unemployed. Even the job that they have is the same as no job, because their wages are so small that it is the same as not having any job at all.

* * *

Question: Mr. Malcolm X says that we are so-called Negroes. I have been raised and taught that I am a Negro and now I have to file applications and they say what nationality are you. I would like for Mr. Malcolm X to tell me what shall I put down after this question when they ask me.


Malcolm X: We put down Asiatic. Asiatic in this sense: the Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that originally this entire planet today known as Earth was called Asia. When you read some of the so-called great historians they even point out that the entire earth was once known as Asia and all of the people on it at that time were Asiatic. The only people here were black, brown, red, and yellow. At that time there were no white people here at all. We refer to ourselves as the Asiatic black man. On my draft card it says Asiatic. And anything that anybody puts in front of me that wants to know what is my race or my nationality, any Muslim will put down Asiatic and that ends it. But never put down Negro. The worst thing that you can call yourself is a Negro. If you dont think so just call yourself that and immediately you will find all the doors closed. But at the same time the blackest man from Africa comes here and he rejects the term Negro. You cant call him a Negro. He will tell you he is an African and every door is open. Last year Kennedy made a special point in Maryland and Virginia to tell all those whites down there: dont do anything to practice discrimination against the African. Now at the same time he wouldnt make any statements concerning the American Negro, but he did come out and make a statement about the Africans. Which shows you that there is a difference between being Negro and being black. The African proudly calls himself black. But now when you call yourself a Negro that is when you encounter all these racial indignities.

Question: The Muslims seem to have a great deal of answers to many of the problems that seem to surround the Negro neighborhoods. Now, why is it they dont have enough of their men who can go around, help work, and solve some of the problems, not only in Philadelphia, but nationwide. The Muslims seem to be doing a very fine job of recruiting men and turning them over from vice and crime into a better way of life. If the Negroes in our society who can see this group would come about to work with them, even if they dont follow a religious program, I think, as he said, we should put away our differences and seek a way to a better understanding.

Malcolm X: Thats a good question. An incident that happened recently right here in Philadelphia pretty well answers that. The local president of the local NAACP, Attorney Moore, came out and began to take a militant, uncompromising stand in behalf of the black people, and immediately he was accused of being a Muslim, from what I read in the paper. Instead of giving him credit for showing leadership, for showing the dynamic necessary to approach this problem and get it solved, all of the other elements, from what I understand, banded against him and attacked him. Now as Muslims it is an admitted fact by the critics of Mr. Muhammad that he is able to eliminate the vice, the immorality, the dope addiction. All the things they accuse the Negro of being guilty of, Mr. Muhammad is able to eliminate. And you would think that all these organizations would try to work with him. But instead of trying to work with him, as he would like to work with them, they cant do it because usually they dont have that much independence. Most of these Negro leaders have been put in their positions as leaders by the white man, and the only other black people that they can work with are black people who are approved also by the white man. And since the Muslims, Mr. Muhammad and his followers, are not on the approved list of the white man, this type of Negro leadership is afraid to openly identify or sympathize with what Mr. Muhammad is doing even though they know that what he is doing is good for the problems that our people are confronted with.

Question: Sir, what I wanted to know is, being that he has just asked the question that the Muslims have men that will go out to work with organizations like NAACP regardless of religions, their creedthey wont accept these members of the Muslim sect to do this, would he suggest that those who are qualified should infiltrate and perhaps try to influence them in the religion of Muhammad?

Malcolm X: He struck up a good point. I think youll find, brother, that there are Muslims everywhere. Wherever you find militancy today among so-called Negroes, watch real closely. Youre liable to be looking at a Muslim. This is by now what the white man is beginning to be afraid of. Every time he sees a Negro who speaks without compromise he swears that this man must be a Muslim. Thats why I used Cecil Moore as an example. As long as you have a local man here in Philadelphia who can be maneuvered and manipulated and frightened by the white liberal, all these other Negro leaders will fall right in line and go along with him. But as soon as you get a black man who will stand upI dont care whether he is in the NAACP or CORE or in any other organizationif he starts taking an uncompromising stand whether the white man likes it or not, youll find that the Uncle Tom leadership will rally against him and classify him or charge him or signify or insinuate that he must be a Black Muslim. And youll never make progress as long as you have those kinds of Negroes around. The only time the Negro leaders show any tendency in trying to get together in unity is when they want to attack another Negro. But those same Negroes who unite against one Negro, you cant get them to unite together on any problem under the sun except against another Negro.

Question: I feel that the American Negroes have enough money to get together and build, but they just wont do it. As you say, theyll fight each other and still bicker among themselves. So I can see what you are talking about there. But I also would like to know what he thinks about the real white man.

Moderator: I don t know what he means by the real white man. Is there an unreal white man?

Malcolm X: The real one is probably the one he sees after his eyes come open. I might comment on something that he said that was very important, about the Negro having enough money to actually solve his problems. Anytime the so-called Negro has access to twenty billion dollars a year and you dont find him able to provide job opportunities himself, this is a sign of sickness. And the Honorable Elijah Muhammad says that if this so-called Negro would channel his wealth into business enterprises and create employment or create businesses that would provide employment then our problem would be solved. But as a rule, sir, in most Negro communities across the country the only thing youll find Negroes building are Negro churches. An example: In Long Island the white man bought a city block. He built a huge supermarket on it. It creates job opportunities for about three or four hundred people. Now in the next block, believe it or not, the Negroes got together and bought it and built a million-dollar church. Now here this church provides a job only for the preacher; it provides clothing and shelter only for this Negro preacher. Now if this Negro preacher has the ingenuity that it takes to raise a million dollars or to finance a million-dollar project, but the only thing he can finance is a church, its a problem. If you notice, white people in their neighborhoods build factories, they build schools, they build everything, and then they also build churches. But the Negro leadership, especially the religious leadership, has actually committed a crime almost in encouraging our people to build churches. But at the same time we never build schools; we never build factories; we never build businesses; we never build housing and things that will solve our problem.

Question: Do you approve of the Cubans coming to this country when we have so much unemployment already?

Malcolm X: I dont get involved in politics. But it does make the black people in this country who are jobless and unemployed and standing in the welfare line very much discouraged to see a government that cant solve our problem, cant provide job opportunities for us, and at the same time not only Cubans but Hungarians and every other type of white refugee imaginable can come to this country and get everything this government has to offer. But the Negro, this faithful soldier during wartime and servant during peace time, is always the last one in line when it comes to having some of his problems solved. It is not surprising that Hungarians and Polacks and Cubans can come to this countrywho have never fought for this country, who have never contributed anything to this countrys economy, who have never contributed to the defense of this democracycan come here and get all the benefits of it. But the black man who has contributed with his life blood and his sweat for four hundred years is still the last hired and the first fired, and the only time they recognize him first is when it comes time to draft him into the army in defense of his country. I think first things first. And the first law of nature is self-preservation. And we are interested in the black man in this country. And the white manif he has got all that money to be given away all over the worldshould be doing something toward correcting the condition that his own crime created when he brought our people here and made us slaves.

Question: I would like Malcolm X to explain what he thinks about all this talk about birth control. Who is it for?

Malcolm X: The white man is worried today the same way that Pharaoh was worried when you read the first chapter of Exodus in the Bible. The slaves under Pharaoh had begun to multiply so fast and Pharaoh and his people were almost becoming sterile. It tells you in there that because these Hebrew slaves were multiplying so fast Pharaoh had to devise a scheme whereby the fertile women and the babies that they were producing would be destroyed. And all this birth control that you hear the white man talking about today, it is not birth control. It is sterilization designed to make this productive, fertile black woman stop producing. As the previous listener pointed out, they never tell you the real number of black people in this country. When you look around here in Philadelphia and New York and Chicago and other cities why you can hardly go into any community without seeing a large number of black faces. Negroes are multiplying, they are increasing too swiftly. And just as Pharaoh had to do something to stop the growth of his slaves, today the American white man must do something to stop the rapid increase of the so-called Negroes. Already the Negro is the balance of power in any political election. The Negro holds the balance of power. In anything that goes on in this country, the ever-increasing number of Negroes holds the balance of power. So something must be done to stop that growth or else it has to be controlled. And it cannot be done the legal way or ethical way so they use underhanded measures or underhanded methods in so doing.

Question: I want to comment on the magazine article, number one. The Saturday Evening Post did the same thing when Nkrumah, if youll remember, took over Ghana. He took the image of the Queen of England out of the Parliament. He took their image off his currency and he replaced them with their own portraits so that they could stimulate black honor and black dignity in their people. Now The Saturday Evening Post is doing the same thing now. Thats one thing I want to point out. Now I want to ask Malcolm X this: Is it true that in your Elijah Muhammad speech two weeks ago you said that the struggle in the Congo was a struggle to recreate world colonialism and to control the resources of the Congo, because 86 and 2/10 percent of the copper is used in America and the gold deposits and also the stuff of which they make atomic bombs. If that is cut off America will suffer. And why are they spending $10,500,000 per month to kill people in Africa when they wont spend $10,500,000 a month to help the people right here in America?

Malcolm X: Sir, youre a man after my own heart. Im glad that you were able to see how the white press immediately turned against Nkrumah when they found out that they couldnt control him and use him as an agent as they use many others over there. And it is true that Katanga Province is one of the richest sources of minerals, vital minerals, that exists on this earth. And if you were to do some research and find out who it is who has money invested in Katangasome of them who are sitting in high positions in this government right now in this country, and some of them who are accepted by Negroes in this country as liberals in shining armorwhen you find out who among the wealthy whites or powerful whites have money invested in the Congo or in Katanga, then you will see behind the struggle over there and why there is so much support for this man Tshombe and for trying to keep him in power. Anything you read in our newspaper, Muhammad Speaks, you can bet that it is true. If it wasnt truth they would stop us from printing it. And it is the only black paper in this country that will give you the raw truth that is taking place anywhere in which black people are involved on this earth. Did I answer all his questions?

Moderator: I think so. He used some figures.

Malcolm X: It was true, and I wanted to point out, as a preacher, this man shows great intelligence in being able to analyze the news and show how the white press, as soon as the black man begins to take a militant and uncompromising stand, whether it be in America or Africa, will begin to project that man either as a dictator or as a black supremacist or teacher of hate.

Question: I would like to know whether it is true that Malcolm X was arrested within the past four weeks and I how much bond he had to pay to get out of jail.

Malcolm X: I have never been arrested since I became a Muslim. What you are probably talking about is when two of our brothers were arrested in Times Square in New York on Christmas Day, selling newspapers, selling our newspaper in Times Square. In this particular paper there was an article about Congressman Nix, a local congressman from right here in this city, in which he himself took a stand, an open stand, against police brutality. And by the brothers selling the paper in the Times Square area a white policeman took offense and tried to stop them and arrested them and charged the two brothers with assaulting the cop. This is what police always do in cases of police brutality. They brutalize the black man and then turn around and charge the black man with attacking them. So we all went to court on that. But I didnt go as an arrested person. I went as a Muslim who was interested in seeing that my brother got justice. No sir, I have never been arrested since I have been a follower of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. But that doesnt mean I am afraid to be arrested, and it doesnt mean that I am afraid of jail or prison. When it comes to telling the truth about what the white man is doing to the black people in this country Ill tell it and go to jail myself. They dont have to take me, I will go. So they can never hold that thing in front of me as a kind of threat. That is one of the things that the white man uses to make Negroes afraid to take a stand. You dont have to go behind bars to be in jail in this country. If you are born in this country with black skin you are already in jail, you are already confined, you are already watched over by a warden who poses as your mayor and poses as your governor and poses as your President. He is nothing but your warden keeping you in confinement. Dont ever talk that jail talk to me. Ill go faster than anybody in this country for the truth and be proud to go and be proud to die for the truth that the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is teaching us. And any other Muslim will be just as proud to do so, and will do it just as fast.

Question: Mr. X claims that our spending power is about twenty billion dollars. Is that true?

Malcolm X: Yes sir, according to the government economists.

Question: Well, all the speeches you make, or anyone else makes, is not going to make any difference in the world to the American Negro until he learns to hold onto that money. As fast as he gets it in his hands he runs around the corner and hands it back to the white man. The American Negro has got to put that money to use and build schools and build businesses.

Malcolm X: Sir, I agree with everything you say. Everything you say is 100 percent true, and if you notice the Muslims have set up schools. If youll read this Saturday Evening Post article, they dont like it. The white man doesnt like it but the Honorable Elijah Muhammad has set up a school in Detroit, a school in Chicago, and schools elsewhere, and it is in these schools that the racial dignity of the black man is taught to our children. We dont have any dropouts. We dont have any delinquency. We dont have any crime rate. We dont have the problems that the white man accuses the Negroes of allowing to exist in the Negro community. Insofar as the twenty billion dollars are concerned, we dont blame the white man because we are not able to take advantage of this money. We blame ourselves. And this is what the Honorable Elijah Muhammad says. That instead of us sitting around here begging the white man for a job in his factory or a house in his neighborhood, what we need to do is get together and unite. Pool our resources, pool our talent, and do something for ourselves. But what you have to understand is that the white man is afraid. The white man has a guilt complex and the white people today are so afraid since they know what they have done to the black people in this country. Their secret fear is that if the black man ever gets independent, if he ever gets able to stand on his own feet, the fear on the part of the whites is that you and I will retaliate against him. So the whites dont want the Negro to become involved in any kind of program that is going to make them independent of whites. They want the Negro to launch a program that the whites can still control or that the whites can still influence or in which they can still offer their guidance. But they do not want us to separate from them and go out on our own as the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is teaching us to.

Question: What does Mr. X think about the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King?

Malcolm X: I think that any black man who goes among so-called Negroes today who are being brutalized, spit upon in the worst fashion imaginable, and teaches those Negroes to turn the other cheek, to suffer peacefully, or love their enemy is a traitor to the Negro. Everybody on this earth has the right to defend himself. Everybody on this earth who defends himself is respected. Now the only people who are encouraged to love their enemy is the American Negro. The only people who are encouraged to adopt this old passive resistance or wait-until-you-change-your-mind-and-then-let-me philosophy is the American Negro. And any man that propagates that kind of doctrine among Negroes is a traitor to those people. It is time for the black people in this country to come together and unite and do whatever is necessary to gain the recognition and respect of the world. And you know what Patrick Henry had to do to get some respect: he said liberty or death. He didnt talk any kind of peaceful suffering or passive resistance. George Washington didnt talk peaceful suffering or passive resistance. No hero who is respected by whites ever tried to propagate some kind of peaceful suffering or passive resistance. The Hungarian Freedom Fighters fought against the Russians. The odds were against them. They were greatly outnumbered, the odds were against them, but because they took a stand and were willing to die for what they believed in, those same freedom fighters can come to this country and get respect and recognition and work on jobs and live in communities that these Negro, what do you call em, Freedom Riders, sit-inners, havent been able to do yet. So anytime you will show that you are willing to die for what you believe then you will get respect and recognition and this is what the black man has to learn. If it is all right for black people to be drafted and sent to Korea or South Vietnam or Laos or Berlin or someplace else to fight and die for the white man, then there is nothing wrong with that same black man doing the same thing when he is under the brutality in this country at the hands of the white man.

Question: I was down South recently, in South Carolina, in Georgia, in Florida, and whatever the signs say about desegregating, my wife and I were refused a bathroom, we were refused liquor. What I want to know is: Does he talk the same way down there as he does up here?

Malcolm X: I preach what the Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches me in Florida, Alabama, Louisiana, and throughout the South. I am scheduled to be in Charlotte, North Carolina, next Wednesday. Ive been to Birmingham. We have a large mosque, a group of Muslims, in Birmingham, in Tuscaloosa. No, the South is no different from the North. Let me tell you the only difference. The white man in the South is a wolf. You know where he stands. When he opens his mouth and you see his teeth he looks vicious. Well, the only difference between the white man in the South and the white man in the North is that one is a wolf and this one is a fox. The fox will lynch you and you wont even know you have been lynched. The fox will Jim Crow you and you dont even know youre Jim Crowed. And this is the basic difference between the southern white man and the northern white man.

Moderator: In other words, the northern white man is foxier than the southern white man.

Malcolm X: He is foxy. When he opens his mouth and shows you his teeth you think he is smiling and when you look at a fox you think a fox is smiling, but actually the objective of the fox and the wolf is the same. They want to exploit you, they want to take advantage of you. Both are canine, both are dogsthere is no difference. Their methods might differ, but their objective is the same, and the southern white man and the northern white man are in the same category.

Moderator: To answer the gentlemans question, the answer is that you speak the same in the South as you do in the North.

Malcolm X: Oh, yes, no different. Muslims speak the same everywhere, North, South, East, or West.

Question: I want to ask Malcolm X that he says it is the white mans fault that many of the Negroes have turned against Negroes by them going around killing each other, robbing from each other. And if I am correct I think you said that the white man had driven many of the Negroes to doing what they have done.


Malcolm X: Oh definitely, definitely. When you see Negroes fighting and shooting and killing each other, all this is a throwback from slavery. There has always been open season on Negroes. A Negro can punch a white man in the mouth and the hunting season is always there. If you notice, sir, there is only a certain season when you can kill a bear or a rabbit.

Moderator: You have to have a license to kill an animal.

Malcolm X: You have to have a license. But there are only certain seasons that you can kill that animal. But you dont need a license to kill a Negro and you can shoot one out of seasonanytimeand you wont get any time. By Negroes knowing this, what the white man has done is set up a psychological situation where the average Negro thinks he can do anything to another Negro and get away with it. And this has made us antagonistic toward one another, hostile toward one another, and very disrespectful toward one another. And this is what makes Negroes continue to fight and kill each other.

Question: I am a doctor in the city and this refers to the statements by Malcolm X about the white brutality against the Negroes and the general type of campaign which he seems to state that we have against the Negroes. A great deal of my time is spent in the emergency ward treating whites and blacks, and I must say that the greater percentage of patients who commit brutality to each other are the black to the black. Much of our time is spent suturing up these people, and treating very serious injuries, which shows the great brutality among themselves. And until they can show the whites that they treat themselves in a more humane fashion, I dont think they will develop the respect that they wish. The main thing I wish to say is that they should be improving themselves, as he stated, and they shouldnt speak of wanting money from government and whites, as he did in referring to the Cuban situation.

Malcolm X: I think that the doctor brought out a very good point. It is true that Negroes kill Negroes but this is because the white man himself has taught Negroes to hate Negroes. The Negro hates another Negro because this was taught to us during slavery and the Negro hates everything about himself. And what the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is doing is teaching our people to love ourselves, respect ourselves, and uplift ourselves. And if the white man would realize that what the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is doing is actually correcting the myth that the white man has made, then the white man should stop harassing Mr. Muhammad and propagandizing against him and misrepresenting him in his news media, and instead thank him for the good work that he is doing.

Moderator: Thank you, Mr. Malcolm X.
It should be pointed out at the outset that I represent the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, whose followers are known as the Muslims here in America and actually are the fastest growing groupfastest growing religious groupamong Black people anywhere in the Western Hemisphere. And it is our intention to try and spell out what the philosophy and aims and motivations of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad happen to be and his solution to this very serious problem that America finds herself confronted with.

And I might point out, too, that if you dont think that the problem is serious, then you need only to listen to the attorney general, Robert F. Kennedy. In almost every speech hes been involved in, especially during the past few months and even today, he has pointed out that the race problem is Americas most serious domestic problem. And since the problem is so serious, its time to take some serious steps to get to the factors that create this problem.

And again I want to thank the African Students Association and the campus NAACP for displaying the unity necessary to bring a very controversial issue before the students here on campus. The unity of Africans abroad and the unity of Africans here in this country can bring about practically any kind of achievement or accomplishment that Black people want today.

When I say the Africans abroad and the Africans here in this countrythe man that you call Negro is nothing but an African himself. Why, some of them have been brainwashed into thinking that Africa is a place with no culture, no history, no contribution to civilization or science. So many of these Negroes, they take offense when theyre identified with their homeland. But today we want to point out the different types of Negroes that you have to deal with. Then once you know theres more than one type, then you wont come up with just one type solution.

And to point out how timely the invitation is, or wasI dont want to read newspapers to you, but in the Detroit News dated Thursday, January 17, it told about the Interfaith Council of Religion that was held in Chicago last week. And the topic of their conversation was the race problem here in America. And it pointed out that all of the time that they spent and money that they spent, actually they didnt get to the meat of the issue. And in this particular copy of the paper, on page three, the chaplain at Wayne State University actually criticized the efforts of these Protestants, Catholics, and Jews in Chicago last week for failing to bring spokesmen to that conference who really would speak for Black people and spell out issues that were not being spelled out by the others.

And I just want to read a recommendation that he made: "Mr. Malcolm Boyd believes that the conference might have accomplished much good if the speakers had included a white supremacist and a Negro race leader, preferably a top man in the American Black Muslim movement." He said that a debate between them would undoubtedly be bitter, but it would accomplish one thing. It would get some of the real issues out into the open. And I think that the man is right. Most of the so-called Negroes that you listen to on the race problem usually dont represent any following of Black people. Usually they are Negroes who have been put in that position by the white man himself. And when they speak theyre not speaking for Black people, theyre saying exactly what they know the white man who put them in that position wants to hear them say.

So again, I think that it was very progressive and objective on the part of these two sponsoring groups to give us an opportunity to tell you how Black people really think and how Black people really feel and how dissatisfied Black people have becomeincreasingly sowith the conditions that our people find ourselves in here in this country.

Now in speaking as aprofessing to speak for Black people by representing the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, you want to know who does he represent. Who does he speak for? There are two types of Negroes in this country. Theres the bourgeois type who blinds himself to the condition of his people, and who is satisfied with token solutions. Hes in the minority. Hes a handful. Hes usually the hand-picked Negro who benefits from token integration. But the masses of Black people who really suffer the brunt of brutality and the conditions that exist in this country are represented by the leadership of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad.

So when I come in here to speak to you, Im not coming in here speaking as a Baptist or a Methodist or a Democrat or a Republican or a Christian or a Jew or not even as an American. Because if I stand up hereif I could stand up here and speak to you as an American we wouldnt have anything to talk about. The problem would be solved. So I dont even profess to speak as an American. We are speaking asI am speaking as a Black man. And Im letting you know how a Black man thinks, how a Black man feels, and how dissatisfied Black men should have been 400 years ago. So, and if I raise my voice youll forgive me or excuse me, Im not doing it out of disrespect. Im speaking from my heart, and you get it exactly as the feeling brings it out.

When I pointed out that there are two kinds of Negroessome Negroes dont want a Black man to speak for them. That type of Negro doesnt even want to be Black. Hes ashamed of being Black. And youll never hear him refer to himself as Black. Now that type we dont pretend to speak for. You can speak for him. In fact you can have him.

But the ones that the Honorable Elijah Muhammad speaks for are those whose pattern of thinking, pattern of thought, pattern of behavior, pattern of action is being changed by what the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is teaching throughout America. These are that mass element, and usually when you hear the press refer to the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, they refer to him as a teacher of hate or an advocator of violence orwhats this other thing...Black supremacist.

Actually this is the type of propaganda put together by the press, thinking that this will alienate masses of Black people from what hes saying. But actually the only one whom that type of propaganda alienates is this Negro whos always up in your face begging you for what you have or begging you for a chance to live in your neighborhood or work on your job or marry one of your women. Well that type of Negro naturally doesnt want to hear what the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is talking about. But the type that wants to hear what hes saying is the type who feels that hell get farther by standing on his own feet and doing something for himself towards solving his own problem, instead of accusing you of creating the problem and then, at the same time, depending upon you to do something to solve the problem.

So you have two types of Negro, the old type and the new type. Most of you know the old type. When you read about him in history during slavery he was called Uncle Tom. He was the house Negro. And during slavery you had two Negroes. You had the house Negro and the field Negro. The house Negro usually lived close to his master. He dressed like his master. He wore his masters secondhand clothes. He ate food that his master left on the table. And he lived in his masters house probably in the basement or the atticbut he still lived in the masters house. So whenever that house Negro identified himself, he always identified himself in the same sense that his master identified himself. When his master said, We have good food, the house Negro would say, Yes, we have plenty of good food. We have plenty of good food. When the master said that we have a fine home here, the house Negro said, Yes, we have a fine home here. When the master would be sick, the house Negro identified himself so much with his master hed say, Whats the matter boss, we sick? His masters pain was his pain. And it hurt him more for his master to be sick than for him to be sick himself When the house started burning down, that type of Negro would fight harder to put the masters house out than the master himself would.

But then you had another Negro out in the field. The house Negro was in the minority. The massesthe field Negroes were the masses. They were in the majority. When the master got sick, they prayed that hed die. If his house caught on fire, theyd pray for a wind to come along and fan the breeze. If someone came to the house Negro and said, Lets go, lets separate, naturally that Uncle Tom would say, Go where? What could I do without boss? Where would I live? l How would I dress? Who would look out for me? Thats the house Negro. But if you went to the field Negro and said, Lets go, lets separate, he wouldnt even ask you where or how. Hed say, Yes, lets go. And that one ended right there.

So today you have a twentieth-century type of house Negro. A twentieth-century Uncle Tom. Hes just as much an Uncle Tom today as Uncle Tom was 100 or 200 years ago. Only hes a modern Uncle Tom. That Uncle Tom wore a handkerchief around his head. This Uncle Tom wears a top hat. Hes sharp. He dresses just like you do. He speaks the same phraseology, the same language. He tries to speak it better than you do. He speaks with the same accents, same diction. And when you say, your army, he says, our army. He hasnt got anybody to defend him, but anytime you say we he says we. Our president, our government, our Senate, our congressmen, our this and our that. And he hasnt even got a seat in that our even at the end of the line. So this is the twentieth century Negro. Whenever you say you, the personal pronoun in the singular or in the plural, he uses it right along with you. When you say youre in trouble, he says, Yes, were in trouble.

But theres another kind of Black man on the scene. If you say youre in trouble, he says, Yes, youre in trouble. He doesnt identify himself with your plight whatsoever.

And this is the thing that the white people in America have got to come to realize. That there are two types of Black people in this country. One who identifies with you so much so he will let you brutalize him and still beg you for a chance to sit next to you. And then theres one whos not interested in sitting next to you. Hes not interested in being around you. Hes not interested in what you have. He wants something of his own. He wants to sit someplace where he can call his own. He doesnt want a seat in your restaurant where you can give him some old bad coffee or bad food. He wants his own restaurant. And he wants some land where he can build that restaurant on, in a city that it can go in. He wants something of his own.

And when you realize that this type of thinking is existing and developing fastly or swiftly behind the teachings of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad among the so-called Negroes, then I think that youll also realize that this whole phony effort at integration is no solution. Because the most you can do with this phony effort toward integration is to put out some token integration. And whereas this Uncle Tom will accept your token effort, the masses of Black people in this country are no more interested in token integration than they would be if you offered them a chance to sit inside a furnace somewhere. The only one wholl do that is this twentieth-century Uncle Tom. And you can always tell him because he wants to be next to you. He wants to eat with you. He wants to sleep with you. He wants to marry your woman, marry your mother, marry your sister, marry your daughter. And if you watch him close enough hes even after your wife.

This type has blind faithin your religion. Hes not interested in any religion of his own. He believes in a white Jesus, white Mary, white angels, and hes trying to get to a white heaven. When you listen to him in his church singing, he sings a song, I think they call it, wash me white as snow. He wants to be, he wants to be turned white so he can go to heaven with a white man. Its not his fault; its actually not his fault. But this is the state of his mind. This is the result of 400 years of brainwashing here in America. You have taken a man who is Black on the outside and made him white on the inside. His brain is white as snow. His heart is white as snow. And therefore, whenever you say, this is ours, he thinks hes white the same as you, so whats yours he thinks is also his. Even right on down to your woman.

Now many of them will take offense at my implying that he wants your woman. Theyll say, No, this is what Bill Bowen, Talmadge, and all of the White Citizens Councils say. They say that to fool you. If this is not what they want, watch them. And if you find evidence to the contrary, then Ill take back my words. But all you have to do is give him the chance to get near you, and youll find that he is not satisfied until he is sitting next to your woman, or closer to her than that.

And this type of Negro, usually he hates Black and loves white. He doesnt want to be Black, he wants to be white. And hell get on his bended knees and beg you for integration, which means he would rather liverather than live with his own kind who love him, hell force himself to live in neighborhoods around white people whom he knows dont mean him any good. And again I say, this is not his fault. He is sick. And as long as America listens to this sick Negro, who is begging to be integrated into American society despite the fact that the attitude and actions of whites are sufficient proof that he is not wanted, why then you are actually allowing him to force you into a position where you look just as sick as he looks.

If someone holds a gun on a white man and makes him embrace meput his hand, arm, around me this isnt love nor is it brotherhood. What they are doing is forcing the white man to be a hypocrite, to practice hypocrisy. But if that white man will put his arm around me willingly, voluntarily, of his own volition, then thats love, thats brotherhood, thats a solution to the problem.

Likewise, as long as the government has to get out here and legislate to force Negroes into a white neighborhood or force Negroes into a white school or force Negroes into white industryand make white people pretend that they go for thisall the government is doing is making white people be hypocrites. And rather than be classified as a bigot, by putting a block, the average white person actually would rather put up a hypocritical face, the face of a hypocrite, than to tell the Black man, No, you stay over there and let me stay over here. So thats no solution.

As long as you force people to act in a hypocritical way, you will never solve their problem. The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that a solution has to be devised that will be satisfactory, completely satisfactory to the Black man and completely satisfactory to the white man. And the only thing that makes white people completely satisfied and Black people completely satisfied, when theyre in their right mind, is when the Black man has his own and the white man has his own You have what you need; we have what we need. Then both of us have something, and even the Bible says, God bless the child that has his own. And the poor so-called Negro doesnt have his own name, doesnt have his own language, doesnt have his own culture, doesnt have his own history. He doesnt have his own country. He doesnt even have his own mind. And he thinks that hes Black cause God cursed him. Hes not Black cause God cursed him. Hes Black becauserather hes cursed because hes out of his mind. He has lost his mind. He has a white mind instead of the type of mind that he should have.

So, when these so-called Negroes who want integration try and force themselves into the white society, which doesnt solve the problemthe Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that that type of Negro is the one that creates the problem. And the type of white person who perpetuates the problem is the one who poses as a liberal and pretends that the Negro should be integrated, as long as he integrates someone elses neighborhood. But all these whites that you see running around here talking about how liberal they are, and we believe everybody should have what they want and go where they want and do what they want, as soon as a Negro moves into that white liberals neighborhood, that white liberal iswell he moves out faster than the white bigot from Mississippi, Alabama, and from someplace else.

So we wont solve the problem listening to that Uncle Tom Negro, and the problem wont be solved listening to the so-called white liberal. The only time the problem is going to be solved is when a Black man can sit down like a Black man and a white man can sit down like a white man. And make no excuses whatsoever with each other in discussing the problem. No offense will stem from factors that are brought up. But both of them have to sit down like men, on one side and on the other side, and look at it in terms of Black and white. And then take some kind of solution based upon the factors that we see, rather than upon that which we would like to believe.

And when I said that this Negro wants to force his way into the white mans family, this integrationist-minded Negro wants to force his way into the white mans family, some dont believe that. Some take issue with that. But you take all of the integrationists, all of those who are used to finance the program of the integrationists, the average so-called Negro celebrity, put all of them in one pile. And as fast as you name them off, youll find that every one of them is married either to a white woman or a white man. From Lena Horne, Eartha Kitt, Sammy Davis, and you could name em all night long, theyalthough they say that this is not what we wantthats what theyve done. Thats what they have. And we dontthe Black masses dont want what Lena Horne wants or what Sammy Davis wants or what whos-his-name, the rest of them want.

Usually youll find that before Sammy Davis and Lena Horne and Eartha Kitt and Harry Belafonte became involved in a mixed marriage you could go into the Negro community, any one across the country, and find those stars with records on the jukeboxes in the Negro community. You cant walk into a Negro community today and find anybody that the Negro community knows is involved in a mixed marriage with their records being popular in the Negro community. Subconsciously a Negro doesnt have any respect or regard or confidence, nor can he be moved by, another Black man, a Black man who marries a white woman or a Black woman who marries a white man.

And when they put out that picture to you that all of us want your woman, no, just that twentieth- century Uncle Tom. He wants her. But, then when you fulfillthink youre going to solve your problem by pleasing him, youre only making the problem worse. You have to go back and listen to the problem as it is presented by the masses of Black people, not by these handpicked, handful of Uncle Sam who benefit from token integration.

Also this type of so-called Negro, by being intoxicated over the white man, he never sees beyond the white man. He never sees beyond America. He never looks at himself or where he fits into things on the world stage. He only can see himself here in America, on the American stage or the white stage, where the white man is in the majority, where the white man is the boss. So this type of Negro always feels like hes outnumbered or hes the underdog or hes the minority. And it puts him in the role of a beggara cowardly, humble, Uncle Tomming beggar on anything that he says isthat should be his by right.

Whereas there ishe wants to be an American rather than to be Black. He wants to be something other than what he is. And knowing that America is a white country, he knows he cant be Black and be an American too. So he never calls himself Black. He calls himself an American Negroa Negro in America. And usually hell deny his own race, his own color, just to be a second-class American. Hell deny his own history, his own culture. Hell deny all of his brothers and sisters in Africa, in Asia, in the East, just to be a second-class American. He denies everything that he represents or everything that was in his past, just to be accepted into a country and into a government that has rejected him ever since he was brought here.

For this Negro is sick. He has to be sick to try and force himself amongst some people who dont want him, or to be accepted into a government that has used its entire political system and educational system to keep him relegated to the role of a second-class citizen. Therefore he spends a lifetime begging for acceptance into the same government that made slaves of his people. He gives his life for a country that made his people slaves and still confines them to the role of second-class citizens. And we feel that he wastes his time begging white politicians, political hypocrites, for civil rights or for some kind of first-class citizenship.

He is like a watchdog or a hound dog. You may run into a dogno matter how vicious a dog is, you find him out in the street, he wont bite you. But when you get him up on the porch, he will growl, hell take your leg. Now that dog, when hes out in the street, only his own life is threatened, and hes never been trained to protect himself. Hes only been trained by his master to think in terms of whats good for his master. So when you catch him in the street and you threaten him, hell go around you. But when you come up on the through the gate when hes sitting on the masters porch, then hell bare his fangs and get ready to bite you. Not because youre threatening him, but because you threaten his master who has trained him not to protect himself but to protect the property of the master.

And this type of twentieth century Uncle Tom is the same way. Hell never attack you, but hell attack me. I can run into him out on the street and blast him; he wont say a word. But if I look like Im about to blast you in here, hell open up his mouth and put up a better defense for you than you can put up for yourself. Because he hasnt been trained to defend himself. He has only been trained to open up his mouth in defense of his master. He hasnt been educated, hes been trained. When a man is educated, he can think for himself and defend himself and speak for himself. But this twentieth century Uncle Tom Negro never opens up his mouth in defense of a Black man. He opens up his mouth in defense of the white man, in defense of America, in defense of the American government. He doesnt even know where his government is, because he doesnt know that he ever had one. He doesnt know where his country is, because he doesnt know that he ever had one.

He believes in exactly what he was taught in school. That when he was kidnapped by the white man, he was a savage in the jungle someplace eating people and throwing spears and with a bone in his nose. And the average American Negro has that concept of the African continent. It is not his fault. This is what has been given to him by the American educational system.

He doesnt realize that there were civilizations and cultures on the African continent at a time when the people in Europe were crawling around in the caves, going naked. He doesnt realize that the Black man in Africa was wearing silk, was wearing slippersthat he was able to spin himself, make himself at a time when the people up in Europe were going naked.

He doesnt realize that he was living in palaces on the African continent when the people in Europe were living in caves. He doesnt realize that he was living in a civilization in Africa where science had been so far advanced, especially even the astronomical sciences, to a point where Africans could plot the course of the stars in the universe when the people up in Europe still thought the earth was round, the planet was roundor flat. He doesnt realize the advancement and the high state of his own culture that he was living in before he was kidnapped and brought to this country by the white man He knows nothing about that. He knows nothing about the ancient Egyptian civilization on the African continent. Or the ancient Carthaginian civilization on the African continent. Or the ancient civilizations of Mali on the African continent. Civilizations that were highly developed and produced scientists. Timbuktu, the center of the Mali Empire, was the center of learning at a time when the people up in Europe didnt even know what a book was. He doesnt know this, because he hasnt been taught. And because he doesnt know this, when you mention Africa to him, why he thinks youre talking about a jungle. And I went to Africa in 1959 and didnt see any jungle. And I didnt see any mud huts until I got back to Harlem in New York City.

So youre familiar with that type of Negro. And the Black man that youre not familiar with is the one that we would like to point out now.

He is the newhe is the new type. He is the type that the white man seldom ever comes in contact with. And when you do come in contact with him, youre shocked, because you didnt know that this type of Black man existed. And immediately you think, well heres one of those Black supremacists or racists or extremists who believe in violence and all of that kind ofwell thats what they call it.

This new type of Black man, he doesnt want integration; he wants separation. Not segregation, separation. To him, segregation, as were taught by the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, means that which is forced upon inferiors by superiors. A segregated community is a Negro community. But the white community, though its all white, is never called a segregated community. Its a separate community. In the white community, the white man controls the economy, his own economy, his own politics, his own everything. Thats his community. But at the same time while the Negro lives in a separate community, its a segregated community. Which means its regulated from the outside by outsiders. The white man has all of the businesses in the Negro community. He runs the politics of the Negro community. He controls all the civic organizations in the Negro community. This is a segregated community.

We dont go for segregation. We go for separation. Separation is when you have your own. You control your own economy; you control your own politics; you control your own society; you control your own everything. You have yours and you control yours; we have ours and we control ours.
They dont call Chinatown in New York City or on the West Coast a segregated community, yet its all Chinese. But the Chinese control it. Chinese voluntarily live there, they control it. They run it. They have their own schools. They control their own politics, control their own industry. And they dont feel like theyre being made inferior because they have to live to themselves. They choose to live to themselves. They live there voluntarily. And they are doing for themselves in their community the same thing you do for yourself in your community. This makes them equal because they have what you have. But if they didnt have what you have, then theyd be controlled from your side; even though they would be on their side, theyd be controlled from your side by you. So when we who follow the Honorable Elijah Muhammad say that were for separation, it should be emphasized were not for segregation; were for separation. We want the same for ourselves as you have for yourself. And when we get it, then its possible to think more intelligently and to think in terms that are along peaceful lines. But a man who doesnt have what is his, he can never think always in terms that are along peaceful lines.

This new type rejects the white mans Christian religion. He recognizes the real enemy. That Uncle Tom cant see his enemy. He thinks his friend is his enemy and his enemy is his friend. And he usually ends up loving his enemy, turning his other cheek to his enemy. But this new type, he doesnt turn the other cheek to anybody. He doesnt believe in any kind of peaceful suffering. He believes in obeying the law. He believes in respecting people. He believes in doing unto others as he would have done to himself But at the same time, if anybody attacks him, he believes in retaliating if it costs him his life. And it is good for people to know this Because if white people get the impression that Negroes all endorse this old turn-the-other-cheek cowardly philosophy of Dr. Martin Luther King, then whites are going to make the mistake of putting their hands on some Black man, thinking that hes going to turn the other cheek, and hell end up losing his hand and losing his life in the try.
So it is always better to let someone know where you stand. And there are a large number of Black people in this country who dont endorse any phase of what Dr. Martin Luther King and these other twentieth century religious Uncle Toms are putting in front of the public eye to make it look like this is the way, this is the behavior, or this is the thought pattern of most of our people.

Also this new type, youll find, he doesnt look upon it as being any honor to be in America. He knows he didnt come here on the Mayflower. He knows he was brought here in a slave ship. But this twentieth century Uncle Tom, hell stand up in your face and tell you about when his fathers landed on Plymouth Rock. His father never landed on Plymouth Rock; the rock was dropped on him but he wasnt dropped on it.

So this type doesnt make any apology for being in America, nor does he make any apology for the problem his presence in America presents for Uncle Sam. He knows he was brought here in chains, and he knows he was brought here against his will. He knows that the problem itself was created by the white man and that it was created because the white man brought us here in chains against our will. It was a crime. And the one who committed that crime is the criminal today who should pay for the crime that was committed. You dont put the crime in jail, you put the criminal in jail. And kidnapping is a crime. Slavery is a crime. Lynching is a crime. And the presence of 20 million Black people in America against their will is a living witness, a living testimony of the crime that Uncle Sam committed, your forefathers committed, when our people were brought here in chains. And the reason the problem cant be solved today is you try and dress it up and doctor it up and make it look like a favor was done to the Black man by having brought the Black man here. But when you realize that it was a crime that was committed, then you approach the solution to that problem in a different light and then you can probably solve it. And as long as you think Negroes are running around here of the opinion that youre doing them a favor by letting them have some of this and letting them have some of that, why naturally every time you give a little bit more justice or freedom to the Black man, you stick out your chest and say, See, were solving the problem.

Youre not doing the Black man any favor. If you stick a knife in my back, if you put it in nine inches and pull it out six inches, you havent done me any favor. If you pull it all the way out, you havent done me any favor. And this is what you have to realize. If you put a man in jail against his willillegally, hes not guilty you frame him up, and then because he resents what youve done to him, you put him in solitary confinement to break his spirit, then after his spirit is broken, you let him out a little bit and give him the general run of the prison, you havent done him any favor. If you let him out of prison completely, you havent done him any favor, because you put him in there unjustly and illegally in the first place.

Now you have 20 million Black people in this country who were brought here and put in a political, economic, and mental prison. This was done by Uncle Sam. And today you dont realize what a crime your forefathers have committed. And you think that when you open the door a few cracks, and give this little integration-intoxicated Negro a chance to run around in the prison yardthats all hes doingthat youre doing him a favor. But as long as he has to look up to someone who doesnt represent him and doesnt speak for him, that person only represents the warden, he doesnt represent some kind of president or mayor or governor or senator or congressman or anything else.

So this new type the fact has to be faced that he exists. Especially since hes in the house. And he didnt come here because it was his will. So you have to take the blame for his being here. And once you take the blame, then its more easy. Its easier for you to approach the problem more sensibly and try and get a solution. And the solution can never be based upon hypocrisy. The Honorable Elijah Muhammad says that this solution has to be based upon reality. Tokenism is hypocrisy. One little student in the University of Mississippi, thats hypocrisy. A handful of students in Little Rock, Arkansas, is hypocrisy. A couple of students going to school in Georgia is hypocrisy.

Integration in America is hypocrisy in the rawest form. And the whole world can see it. All this little tokenism that is dangled in front of the Negro and then hes told, See what were doing for you, Tom. Why the whole world can see that this is nothing but hypocrisy. All you do is make your image worse; you dont make it better. So again, this new type, as I say, he rejects the white mans Christian religion. You find in large numbers theyre turning toward the religion of Islam. They are becoming Muslims, believing in one God, whose proper name is Allah, in Muhammad as his apostle, in turning toward Mecca, praying five times a day, fasting during Ramadan, and all the other principles that are laid out by the religion of Islam. Hes becoming a Muslim and just asI think it was Dr. Billy Graham who made a crusade through Africa and came back and said that Islam is sweeping through Africa, outnumbering Christianity in converts eleven to one, which means every time one African becomes a Christian, eleven of them become a Muslim. And then that one who became a Christian, he forgets it and goes on and be a Muslim, too.

So thatand Bishop Pike pointed out the same thing in Look magazine in December 1960 and then Time magazine, heaven forbid that I should mention that magazine, but Time magazine mentioned it, two weeks ago, that Islam is sweeping throughout Africa. And just as it is sweeping throughout the Black people of Africa, it is sweeping throughout the Black people right here in America. Only the one whos teaching it here in America is the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. He is the religious leader, the religious teacher. He is the one who is spreading the religion of Islam among the slaves, ex- slaves, here in America.

You have Muslims who have come to this country from the Muslim world. There are probably 200,000 Muslims in this country from the Muslim world, who were born in the Muslim world. And all of them combined have never been able to convert a hundred Americans to the religion of Islam. Yet it is the nature of Islam to propagate the faith, to spread the faith, to make everyone bear witness that theres no God but Allah and Muhammad is his apostle.

And if you find all of the Muslims of the Muslim world who come here, unable or incapable of turning the American people toward Allah and toward Mecca and toward Islam, and then this little Black man from the cotton fields of Georgia is able to stand up and get Black people by the hundreds of thousands to turn toward Mecca five times a day and give praise to Allah and come together in unity and harmony, why youd have to be out of your mind to think the people of the Muslim world dont recognize the wonderful religious and spiritual accomplishment thats being achieved here among the so-called Negroes by the Honorable Elijah Muhammad.

And I take time to mention that because the propagandists try and convey the picture that were not Muslims, were not religiously motivated, and that we are in no way identified or recognized or connected with our people of the Muslim world. Well if they didnt recognize us, we wouldnt care. Were not particularly looking for recognition. Were looking for recognition from Allah, from God, and if Allah accepts you as a Muslim, youre accepted. Its not left to somebody walking around here on this earth. But those people over there would be out of their minds, when they find themselves unable to spread the religion of Islam and then they see this little Black man here in America spreading it, why theyd be out of their mind to reject him. And youll find if you take the time to look, that you dont find any Muslim today who rejects another Muslim. You might find some who come over here, who operate stores or some kind of little business in the white neighborhood, the Christian neighborhood, and they want to get along with all the white people, with all the Christians. They might say some words to please you. But theyre only trying to get your money. So the followers of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad look to him and what he teaches, his program and his message, as our only solution. And they see separation as our only salvation.

We dont think as Americans any more, but as a Black man. With the mind of a Black man, we look beyond America. And we look beyond the interests of the white man. The thinking of this new type of Negro is broad. Its more international. This integrationist always thinks in terms of an American. But you find the masses of Black people today think in terms of Black. And this Black thinking enables them to see beyond the confines of America. And they look all over the world. They look at the happenings in the international context.

By this little integrationist Negro thinking locally, by his thinking and desires being confined to America, hes limited. Hes the underdog. Hes a minority. But the masses of Black people who have been exposed to the teachings of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, their thinking is more international. They look on this earth and they see that the majority of the people on this earth are dark. And by seeing that the majority of the people on this earth are dark, they dont regard themselves as a minority in America, but rather they regard themselves as part of that vast, dark majority.

So therefore, when you run into that type of Black man, he doesnt speak as an underdog. He doesnt speak like you outnumber him, or he doesnt speak like theres any harm that you can do to him. He speaks as one who outnumbers you. He sees that the dark world outnumbers the white world. That the odds have turned today and are in his favor, are on his side. He sees that the people of this earth are on his side. That time is on his side. That history is on his side. And most important of all, he sees that God is on his side toward getting him some kind of solution thats immediate, and thats lasting, and that is no way connected or concerned or stems from the goodwill or good conscience in any way, shape, whatsoever of the man who createdwho committed the crime and created the problem in the first place.

I would like to point out, quickly and brieflyno I wont, I think my time is up...well Dr. here says my time is up, and Im telling him his time is short. So I think whats good for the goose is good for the gander.

* * *

Question: Do you consider Elijah Muhammad as a prophet or as a leader?

Malcolm X: We never refer to the Honorable Elijah Muhammad as a prophet. He never refers to himself as that, and he teaches us that the world has no need for prophets today. But hes a leader, hes a leader of the Black people here in this country against the oppression and exploitation that our people have suffered for 400 years. And we need a leader from among ourselves, because our people back home never came and tried to relieve us of the suffering that weve undergone.

Question: Im a white man...

Malcolm X: Youre not a white man.


Question: If I was a white man, do you accept him to attend your mosque, to worship God with you?

Malcolm X: If theall of the Muslims in this country from Egypt and elsewhere have not been successful in letting the white man to turn toward the religion of Islam and they are born in the Muslim world, well we find wed be wasting our time trying to convert the white man himself. Mr. Muhammad is primarily concerned with the condition of the Black man in this country. Now if the other Muslims who come here from abroad want to set up some kind of mosque and let the white man in it and teach him how to be a Muslim and get him to say, "No God but Allah," then they can do that. But they shouldnt criticize us for not doing it, because they havent succeeded in doing it.


Question: Will you accept me in your mosque?

Malcolm X: Sir, youre not white.


Question: Im asking you if a white man, many people are white men and they are Muslim too.

Malcolm X: I answered you. Mr. Muhammads concern is not with the white man. His concern is with the Black man...Islam means to submit to the will of one God whose personal and proper name is Allah. What you forget, if youre in the Muslim world practicing Islam, youre not faced with the same problem of Black people who have been kidnapped from the Muslim world and have been deprived of Islam.

[Question]

Malcolm X: You have to ask the white man that. Hes the one who segregates us. Segregation is done by him. You have to ask him that question... Sir, I just want to add some light to your question. We are brothers. Mr. Muhammads youngest son attends al-Azhar, and his brother-in-law, in Egypt too. We are brothers, I was in Egypt. I lived in Egypt, I stayed in Egypt, and I was among brothers and I felt the spirit of brotherhood. But an Egyptian who comes to America should realize the problem confronted by Black people in this country. And when you see us being chased by a dog, the best thing for you to do is wait until the dog stops chasing us and then ask us some questions. Especially when you should have come a long time ago and helped your little brothers whip the dog.

[Question]

Malcolm X: There are many different ways to understand politics. Number one, were not a political group. We are not politically inclined or motivated nor are our political aims in any way connected with the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. But when you study the science of politics, or study it as its practiced in the UN at the international level, youll find usually on questions you have those who say yes, those who say no, those who dont say anything. Those who dont say anything usually are the neutrals. And by abstaining they have just as much political power, if not more so, than those who take an active part in all situations. Where the Negro in America is concerned, hes been without the ballot so long, today when he gets the ballot, hes ballot-happy. Hes like the man to whom you give a gun, and he just starts shooting to let everybody know hes got a gun. He doesnt aim at anything. Well, we believe in shooting, too. But we first believe that we should have a target and then when that target gets within our reach, then well put the bullet where it belongs. Or the ballot where it belongs. Whatever you call it, where it belongs. We dont see at this point where the Black man gains anything in politics. Let me just give you an example. In the last presidential election, whites were evenly divided between Kennedy and Nixon. It was the Negro who went for Kennedy, 80 percent, and put Kennedy in the White House. And they went for him based upon the promisesfalse promises, by the waythat he made. Well, facts are facts. He said heI think everybody has a right to his opinion. And Im quite certain those who are familiar with Kennedys promises to the Negro know what he said he could do with the stroke of his pen. And he was in office for two years before he found where his fountain pen was where the Negro was concerned. And the excuse that he used was that he first had to change the attitude of southern segregationists. Now he didnt tell you that when he asked you to vote for him. But was facing. He didnt want to take a stand against the southern segregationists. But he did take a stand against U.S. Steel, which is the strongest corporation on this earth. He threw down the gauntlet. He threw down the gauntlet to Cuba. He has thrown down the gauntlet to anybody he desires. But when it comes to the Negro, hes always got an alibi that puts him off until a little while later. This is why we dont believe in any white politicians or anything like that can solve our problem. Well get together among ourselves, with these students who go to these colleges and get equipped and solve the problem for ourselves.

[Question]

Malcolm X: Whenever you send 15,000 troops and spend six or seven million dollars just to put one Negro in the midst of some yapping wolves, you havent done that Negro nor the masses of Black people any favor, nor have you solved the problem. If its legal and just and right for Meredith to be at the University of Mississippi according to Robert Kennedy, the attorney general, and all of the others, then every other Black man in Mississippi has just as much right to be there. So if youre going to spend all that money and all that manpower putting one in there, why not just go in and take the criminals who are responsible for keeping the masses out, and take them down off their posts and then open the doors to everybody. That would be a solution, but theyre not going to do that. They always want to use methods that push one Negro at a time, then they use him to turn around and tell the masses, "you see, were solving the problem." And the problem is still unsolved. The Honorable Elijah Muhammad says the only way to solve the problem of the so-called Negro is complete separation in the United States. The Honorable Elijah Muhammad says, every effort on the part of the government up till now to solve this problem by bringing about a just, equitable situation between whites and Blacks mixed up together here in this house has failed. Has failed absolutely. So he says that since you cant give the Negro justice in your house, let us leave this house and go back home. Now at the same time that he says let us go back home to our own people and our own homeland, the government itself is the leading opposition toward any mass element of Black people becoming orientated in the direction of home. They put forth the effort to stop this. So what he says is, since you cant give it to us here mixed up in your house, and you dont want us to go home back to our own people, then the only alternative is to separate the house. Give us part of this country and let us live in that part. Youve asked me to explain. Now you want me to proceed? You may think its funny, but one of these days you wont. He says that in this section that will be set aside for Black people, that the government should give us everything we need to start our own civilization. They should give us everything we need to exist for the next twenty-five years. And when you stop and consider that you shouldnt be shocked, you give Latin America $20 billion and they never fought for this country. They never worked for this country. You send billions of dollars to Poland and to Hungary, theyre Communist countries, they never contributed anything here. This is what you should realize. The greatest contribution to this country was that which was contributed by the Black man. If I take the wages, just a moment, if I take the wages of everyone here, individually it means nothing, but collectively all of the earning power or wages that you earned in one week would make me wealthy. And if I could collect it for a year, Id be rich beyond dreams. Now, when you see this, and then you stop and consider the wages that were kept back from millions of Black people, not for one year but for 310 years, youll see how this country got so rich so fast. And what made the economy as strong as it is today. And all that, and all of that slave labor that was amassed in unpaid wages, is due someone today. And youre not giving us anything when we say that its time to collect.

[Question]

Malcolm X: Up until a few years ago, the whole dark world, which was then the majority, was ruled by Europethe white man, who was actually a minority. And realizing that they were only ruled because of the scientific effort put forth to divide and conquer by the European whites, all of the people black, brown, red, and yellow in Africa got together in what was known as the Bandung Conference. They realized that they had religious differences, economic differences, educational differences, even cultural differences. And they agreed to submerge all of their differences because they had one thing in commonoppression, exploitation. And they had an oppressor in common, an exploiter in commonthe European. Once they realized they had this in common, they had a common enemy and they reached the agreement not to fight among themselves anymore. And just by being able to submerge their own differences and come together in a spirit of unity, the Bandung Conference produced the condition by which all of the nations in Africa that are independent today were able to secure their independence. And so they have come into the UN. Now they are in a position they can outvote the white man. And it has actually created an accomplishment. Whereas in the past you had European, white Christians always at the helm in the UN, today the black, brown, red, and yellow people of Africa and Asia so greatly outnumber the white man, they cant get a white, Christian European elected to any position of power. Usually, the secretariat and the presidents chair stays in the hands of an African, an Asian, a Muslim, a Hindu, or a Christian. This is what unity is able to do. And here in America, the Negro, the so-called Negroes, all we have to do is forget our differences. Usually whites cite things to try and divide us, and then use us one against the other. They try and use the NAACP against the Muslims, Muslims against CORE; they try and keep them all fighting one another. And as we fight one another, they continue to rule. So what the Honorable Elijah Muhammad says is what you and I should do is forget all of our differences and put first things first. Get at the one whos holding both of us down and we can talk to each other later on.

[Question]

Malcolm X: The South African whites are, number one, on a continent where they dont belong and have no business there and wont be there that much longer. The Black people in South Africa outnumber the whites there about eleven to one. The Blacks in South Africa outnumber the whites. Enough to get rid of them when the time comes Now, their type of separation is not the type of separation that were looking for. Were looking for a separation in which we have our own. We can either go back home and practice it or we can stay here and practice it. But we are not going to sit around with this integration hypocrisy that whites are talking about which will take another hundred years. The only thing you can bring about in the morning is complete separation. It has no connection or comparison whatsoever with that which is being practiced in South Africa. South African apartheid is segregation. Its not separation. And they are afraid to let those Africans build up a society of their own in which they will become equal or just as powerful politically, economically, and otherwise as the whites are in their parts. They dont want that. No, no comparison whatsoever. Theirs is something of the past, its outmoded and its on its way out. Ours is riding on the wave of the future.

[Question]

Malcolm X: If you cant receive justice in a mans house, that man deprives you of justice, he should let you leave. And if he doesnt want you to leave his house, yet he cant give you justice in the house, hell end up losing the whole house himself. This is what America is faced with.

[Question]

Malcolm X: No, the Fruityou asked another question within thatthe Fruit of Islam are the brothers who have been reformed, rehabilitated; who dont drink, dont smoke, dont commit fornication or adultery, dont become involved in any kind of crime. Who learn how to respect their womento respect the Black woman, who has never had any respect or protection in this society. These are the brothers who have actually reformed themselves and they set an example of what the religion of Islam will do for others of the so-called Negroes. And these brothers will give you respect when you respect them.

[Question]

Malcolm X: No, they dont comprise a small army. But an army in this sensearmy only means a lot of people. They dont comprise an army in the sense that they are looking for violence. But you will find this: that a Muslim brother, whenever hes attacked, hell defend himself.

[Question]

Malcolm X: No, Ill answer the last question first. No, theres no such thing as a sincere white liberal listen Im giving you my answer. You can hiss all night, thats what the snake did in the Garden of Eden. Usually youll find, sir, that in any integrated group that the so-called Negro has, if you examine its composition, where the whites are concerned, they end up leading it, they end up ruling it, they end up controlling it. Ill give you an example. The NAACP is one of the leading organizations that Negroes have. It has been in existence for fifty-four years, and the Black people in the NAACP have never had enough power in there to elect a Black man as the national president. They have an election every year. Which means they have had an election fifty-four times in fifty-four years. And every time, theyve had to elect a white man. The man who is the president of it now, Arthur Spingarn, has been president of it for twenty-four consecutive years. Now ifIm not knocking the NAACPbut if the NAACPIm just, uhm, analyzing it. If the NAACP in fifty-four years cannot get a Black man qualified to be its national president, then it leads me to believe either they are failing to create and develop the proper leadership caliber among the Black people in it, or else they are practicing the same discrimination that they accuse the white man of. Where CORE is concernedthe Urban League is another famous Negro organization thats integrated. It has a white president. It has never had a Black president. CORE has a Negro national director; but hes a Negro whos married to a white woman. James Farmer, hes married to a white woman and that almost makes him a white man. Although they have a Black they have a white president also. Its trueFarmer, in 1945, divorced his Black wife and married a white woman.

[Question]

Malcolm X: In the UN with the Lebanese or Arabsin the UN you have the Afro/Asian/Arab bloc. Now a lot of Arabs might like for you to think that they are white, but whenever you see them involved in the international picture, they are lined up with the dark world. Those who are making progress are lined up with the dark world. Afro, Asian, Arab, they can come around here and pose as white. But when they get back home, theyre not white

[Question]

Malcolm X: You never heard me today refer to myself as a Black Muslim. This is what the press says. We call ourselves Muslim. Just a moment. We call ourselves Muslimwe dont call ourselves Black Muslims. This is what the newspapers call us. This is what Dr. Eric Lincoln calls us. We are Muslims. Black, brown, red, and yellow.

[Question]

Malcolm X: Now you say that we come here and use Islam for political purposes because we reject the white man. When the Algerians refused to integrate with the French, did that make, mean that they werent Muslims? When the Arabs refused to integrate with the Israelis, does that mean theyre not Muslims? When the Pakistanis refused to integrate with the Hindus, does that mean theyre not Muslims? No, just a moment. The Algerians have the right to reject the French, who exploited them. The Arabs have the right to reject the Israelis, whom they feel exploit them. The Pakistanis have the right to reject the Hindus, whom they feel exploit them. The Algerians are still Muslims. The Arabs are still Muslims and the Pakistanis are still Muslims. There are 20 million Black people in this country who have been here for 400 years. And who have suffered the worst form of abuse ever perpetrated on a people in the twentieth century. Now when we accept Islam as our religion, that doesnt mean that we are religiously wrong to reject the man who has exploited us and colonized us here in this country.

[Question]

Malcolm X: Its not wrong to expect justice. Its not wrong to expect freedom. Its not wrong to expect equality. If Patrick Henry and all of the Founding Fathers of this country were willing to lay down their lives to get what you are enjoying today, then its time for you to realize that a large, ever-increasing number of Black people in this country are willing to die for what we know is due us by birth. The white man is being given a favor, when you give him a chance today to solve a problem that stems from a crime that he committed himself. You ask melike Im committing a crime or asking for something thats ethically wrong or morally wrong when we seek a solution to this problem right now. A problem that has the government all tied up all over this earth. What you need to realize, you from India, you from Iraq, you from Egypt, and you from right here in America, and we who are enslavedthat a crime has been committed against the Negro. Some of you from over there, you knew we were over here and never come over here to help us, and now when we stand up and are ready to help ourselves, dont come with your criticism. Help us.

[Question]

Malcolm X: Would you think that I was wrong if I asked: how are you going to integrate? If the Supreme Court says integrate, and they cant do it, and thats the highest courtwere not rejecting anything. We reserve I said no, he asked me was I rejecting, were we rejecting violence or were we rejecting peaceful methods. We dont reject any methods. We leavewe reserve the right to use whatever method that will bring about a solution to the problem and then whenand the reason that I haventSir, I dont think you would give me credit. If you have a lamb inside of a wolfs den and you need to get that lamb out of the clutches of that wolf, you dont stand up and tell the lamb, how are you going to take him, or where youre going to take him, while hes still in the clutches of the wolf, or while hes still under the jurisdiction of the wolf.

[Question]

Malcolm X: As you say, Tom always was a good actor. And where the white man thinks were dangerous to him, Tom is more dangerous to the white man than anyone, because Tom has him fooled. The white man knows where we stand; but Tom today is waking up the same as anybody else. Well, you wont t get any argument out of me. It is true that many Negroes in prominent positions who have been known Uncle Toms in the past today are waking up, and their allegiances and other aims are very much camouflaged still, as they were then.

[Question]

Malcolm X: Well do it the same way the Jews got what they wanted. They got their own state, their own country. No, they got it, and yeah, well youre right, it was given to them by England and Truman. But, sir, no the Jews are the ones who usually represent themselves as white liberals. More so probably than any other segment of this society. Now if the Jews are genuinely liberal and they want to help the Negro, then they should show the Negro how to use the same kind of strategy and tactics to solve his problem that they used to solve their problems. And youll find that all over this country, wherever the Jews have been segregated and Jim Crowed, they havent sat in, they havent been sittin or Freedom Riders, they usually go and use the economic weapon. They bought Atlantic City, and now they can go there. They bought Miami Beach and now they can go there.
Nineteen hundred sixty-four will probably be the most explosive year that America has yet witnessed on the racial front; primarily because the black people of this country during 1963 saw nothing but failure behind every effort they made to get what the country was supposedly on record for. Today the black people in this country have become frustrated, disenchanted, disillusioned and probably more set for action now than ever before-not the kind of action that has been set out for them in the past by some of their supposedly liberal white friends, but the kind of action that will get some kind of immediate results. As the moderator has pointed out, the time that were living in now and that we are facing now is not an era where one who is oppressed is looking toward the oppressor to give him some system or form of logic or reason. What is logical to the oppressor isnt logical to the oppressed. And what is reason to the oppressor isnt reason to the oppressed. The black people in this country are beginning to realize that what sounds reasonable to those who exploit us doesnt sound reasonable to us. There just has to be a new system of reason and logic devised by us who are at the bottom, if we want to get some results in this struggle that is called the Negro revolution.

Not only is it going to be an explosive year on the racial front; it is going to be an explosive year on the political front. This year it will be impossible to separate one from the other. The politicking of the politicians in 1964 will probably do more to bring about racial explosion than any other factor, because this country has been under the rule of the politicians. When they want to get elected to office they come into the so-called Negro community and make a lot of promises that they dont intend to keep. This feeds the hopes of the people in our community, and after the politicians have gotten what they are looking for, they turn their back on the people of our community. This has happened time and time again. The only difference between then and now is that there is a different element in the community; whereas in the past the people of our community were patient and polite, long-suffering and willing to listen to what you call reason, 1964 has produced an element of people who are no longer willing to listen to what you call reason. As I said, whats reasonable to you has long since ceased to be reasonable to us. And it will be these false promises made by the politicians that will bring about the BOOM.

During the few moments that I have I hope that we can chat in an informal way, because I find that when you are discussing things that are very touchy, sometimes its best to be informal. And where white people are concerned, it has been my experience that they are extremely intelligent on most subjects until it comes to race. When you get to the racial issue in this country, the whites lose all their intelligence. They become very subjective, and they want to tell us how it should be solved. Its like Jesse James going to tell the Marshal how he should come after him for the crime that Jesse committed.

I am not a politician. Im not even a student of politics. Im not a Democrat. Im not a Republican. I dont even consider myself an American. If I could consider myself an American, we wouldnt even have any problem. It would be solved. Many of you get indignant when you hear a black man stand up and say, No, Im not an American. I see whites who have the audacity, I should say the nerve, to think that a black man is radical and extremist, subversive and seditious if he says, No, Im not an American. But at the same time, these same whites have to admit that this man has a problem.

I dont come here tonight to speak to you as a Democrat or a Republican or an American or anything that you want me to be. Im speaking as what I am: one of twenty-two million black people in this country who are victims of your democratic system. Theyre the victims of the Democratic politicians, the victims of the Republican politicians. Theyre actually the victims of what you call democracy. So I stand here tonight speaking as a victim of what you call democracy. And you can understand what Im saying if you realize its being said through the mouth of a victim; the mouth of one of the oppressed, not through the mouth and eyes of the oppressor. But if you think were sitting in the same chair or standing on the same platform, then you wont understand what Im talking about. Youd expect me to stand up here and say what you would say if you were standing up here. And Id have to be out of my mind.

Whenever one is viewing this political system through the eyes of a victim, he sees something different. But today these twenty-two million black people who are the victims of American democracy, whether you realize it or not, are viewing your democracy with new eyes. Yesterday our people used to look upon the American system as an American dream. But the black people today are beginning to realize that it is an American nightmare. What is a dream to you is a nightmare to us. What is hope to you has long since become hopeless to our people. And as this attitude develops, not so much on Sugar Hillalthough its there toobut in the ghetto, in the alley where the masses of our people live...there you have a new situation on your hands. Theres a new political consciousness developing among our people in this country. In the past, we werent conscious of the political maneuvering that goes on in this country, which exploits our people politically. We knew something was wrong, but we werent conscious of what it was. Today theres a tendency on the part of this new generation of black people (who have been born and are growing up in this country) to look at the thing not as they wish it were, but as it actually is. And their ability to look at the situation as it is, is what is primarily responsible for the ever-increasing sense of frustration and hopelessness that exists in the so-called Negro community today.

Besides becoming politically conscious, youll find that our people are also becoming more aware of the strategic position that they occupy politically. In the past, they werent. Just the right to vote was considered something. But today the so-called Negroes are beginning to realize that they occupy a very strategic position. They realize what the new trends are and all of the new political tendencies.

During recent years at election time, when the Governor was running for office, there was call for a recount of votes here in Massachusetts. In Rhode Island it was the same way-in Minnesota, the same thing. Within American politics there is now such a similarity between the two parties that in elections the race is usually close enough to permit almost any single block to swing it one way or the other. Not only is this true in city, county, and state elections, but its also true in the national elections, as witness the close race between President Kennedy and Nixon a few years back. And everyone admits that it was the strategic vote of the so-called Negro in this country that put the Kennedy administration in Washington. The position in the political structure of the so-called Negro has become so strategic that whenever any kind of election rolls around now, the politicians are out there trying to win the Negro vote. In trying to win the Negro vote, they make a whole lot of promises and build up his hopes. But they always build him up for a letdown. By being constantly built up for a letdown, the Negro is now becoming very angry at the white man. And in his anger the Muslims come along and talk to him. Yet instead of the white man blaming himself for the anger of the Negro, he again has the audacity to blame us. When we warn you how angry the Negro is becoming, you, instead of thanking us for giving you a little warning, try to accuse us of stirring up the Negro. Dont you know that if your house is on fire and I come to warn you that your house is burning, you shouldnt accuse me of setting the fire! Thank me rather for letting you know whats happening, or whats going to happen, before its too late.

When these new trends develop in the so-called Negro in America, making the so-called Negro aware of his strategic position politically, he becomes aware too of what hes not getting in return. He realizes that his vote puts the governor in office, or the mayor in office, or the president in office. But hes beginning to see also that although his vote is the vital factor that determines who will sit in these seats, the last one those politicians try to help is the so-called Negro.

Proof of which: Everyone admits that it was the Negro vote that put Kennedy in the White House. Yet four years have passed and the present administration is just now getting around to civil rights legislation. In its fourth year of office it finally passes some kind of civil rights legislation, designed supposedly to solve the problem of the so-called Negro. Yet that voting element offered decisive support in the national election. I only cite this to show the hypocrisy on the part of the white man in America, whether he be down South or whether he be up here in the North.

Democrats, now after theyve been in the White House awhile, use an alibi for not having kept their promise to the Negroes who voted for them. They say, Well, we cant get this passed or we cant get that passed. The present make-up of the Congress is 257 Democrats and only 177 Republicans. Now how can a party of Democrats that received practically the full support of the so-called Negroes of this country and control nearly two-thirds of the seats in Congress give the Negro an excuse for not getting some kind of legislation passed to solve the Negro problem? Where the senators are concerned, there are 67 Democrats and only 33 Republicans; yet these Democrats are going to try to pass the buck to the Republicans after the Negro has put the Democrats in office. Now Im not siding with either Democrats or Republicans. Im just pointing out the deceit on the part of both when it comes to dealing with the Negro. Although the Negro vote put the Democratic Party where it is, the Democratic Party gives the Negro nothing; and the Democrats offer as an excuse that the fault lies with the Dixie-crats. What do you call them Dixie-crats or Dixo-crats or Demo-Dixo-crats!

Look at the shrewd deceptive manner in which they deal with the Negro. A Dixo-crat is a Democrat. You can call them by whatever name you wish, but you have never seen a situation where the Dixie-crats kick the Democrats out of the party. Rather the Democrats kick the Dixiecrats out of their party if there is ever any cleavage. You oftentimes find the Dixie-crats cussing out the Democrats, but you never find the Democrats disassociating themselves from the Dixie-crats. They are together and they use this shrewd maneuvering to trick the Negro. Now there are some young Negroes appearing on the scene, and it is time for those who call themselves Democrats to realize that when the Negro looks at a Democrat, he sees a Democrat. Whether you call him a Dixo-Democrat or a Demo-Dixie-crat, hes the same thing.

One of the reasons that these Dixie-crats occupy such a powerful position in Washington, D.C., is that they have seniority. By reason of their seniority and primarily because they have denied the local Negro his right to vote, they hold sway over key committees in Washington. You call it a system based on democracy, yet you cant deny that the most powerful men in this government are from the South. The only reason theyre in positions of power is because the Negroes in their area are deprived of their constitutional right to vote. But the Constitution says that when at any time the people of a given area are denied their right to vote, the representatives of that area are supposed to be expelled from their seat. You dont need any new legislation; its right in front of you already. The only reason the politicians want new legislation is to use it to further trick the Negro. All they have to do is to go by that thing they call the Constitution. It needs no more bills, it needs no more amendments, it needs no more anything. All it needs is a little sincere application.

As with the South, the North knows its own bypass for the Constitution, which goes by the name of gerrymandering. Some fellows gain control in the so-called Negro community and then change voting lines every time the Negro begins to get too powerful numerically. The technique is different from that in Mississippi. There is no denying the Negro the right to vote outright, as in Mississippi. The Northern way is more shrewd and subtle; but whether victim of the Northern way or the Southern method, the Negro ends up with no political power whatsoever. Now, I may not be putting this in language which youre used to, but Im quite sure that you get the point. Whenever you give the Negro in the South the right to vote, his Constitutional right to vote, it will mean an automatic change in the entire representation from the South. Were he able to exercise his right, some of the most powerful and influential figures in Washington, D.C., would not now be in the Capitol. A large Negro vote would change the foreign policy as well as the domestic policy of this government. Therefore the only valid approach toward revolutionizing American policy is to give to the Negro his right to vote. Once that is done, the entire future course of things must change.

I might say this is how we look at ithow the victims look at it, a very crude and what you might call pessimistic view. But I should rather prefer it as a realistic view. Now what is our approach towards solving this? Many of you have probably just recently read that I am no longer an active member in the Nation of Islam, although I am myself still a Muslim. My religion is still Islam, and I still credit the Honorable Elijah Muhammad with being responsible for everything I know and everything that I am. In New York we have recently founded the Muslim Mosque, Incorporated, which has as its base the religion of Islam, the religion of Islam because we have found that this religion creates more unity among our people than any other type of philosophy can do. At the same time, the religion of Islam is more successful in eliminating the vices that exist in the so-called Negro community, which destroy the moral fiber of the so-called Negro community.

So with this religious base, the difference between the Muslim Mosque, Incorporated, and the Nation of Islam is probably this: We have as our political philosophy, Black Nationalism; as our economic philosophy, Black Nationalism; and as our social philosophy, Black Nationalism. We believe that the religion of Islam combined with Black Nationalism is all that is needed to solve the problem that exists in the so-called Negro community. Why?

The only real solution to our problem, just as the Honorable Elijah Muhammad has taught us, is to go back to our homeland and to live among our own people and develop it so well have an independent nation of our own. I still believe this. But that is a long- range program. And while our people are getting set to go back home, we have to live here in the meantime. So in the Honorable Elijah Muhammads long-range program, theres also a short-range program: the political philosophy which teaches us that the black man should control the politics of his own community. When the black man controls the politics and the politicians in his own community, he can then make them produce what is good for the community. For when a politician in the so-called Negro community is controlled by a political machine outside, seldom will that politician ever do what is necessary to bring up the standard of living or to solve the problems that exist in that community. So our political philosophy is designed to bring together the so- called Negroes and to re-educate them to the importance of politics in concrete betterment, so that they may know what they should be getting from their politicians in addition to a promise. Once the political control of the so-called Negro community is in the hands of the so- called Negro, then it is possible for us to do something towards correcting the evils and the ills that exist there.

Our economic philosophy of Black Nationalism means that instead of our spending the rest of our lives begging the white man for a job, our people should be re-educated to the science of economics and the part that it plays in our community. We should. be taught just the basic fundamentals: that whenever you take money out of the neighborhood and spend it in another neighborhood, the neighborhood in which you spend it gets richer and richer, and the neighborhood from which you take it gets poorer and poorer. This creates a ghetto, as now exists in every so-called Negro community in this country. If the Negro isnt spending his money downtown with what we call the man, the man is himself right in the Negro community. All the stores are run by the white man, who takes the money out of the community as soon as the sun sets. We have to teach our people the importance of where to spend their dollars and the importance of establishing and owning businesses. Thereby we can create employment for ourselves, instead of having to wait to boycott your stores and businesses to demand that you give us a job. whenever the majority of our people begin to think along such lines, youll find that we ourselves can best solve our problems. Instead of having to wait for someone to come out of your neighborhood into our neighborhood to tackle these problems for us, we ourselves may solve them.

The social philosophy of Black Nationalism says that we must eliminate the vices and evils that exist in our society, and that we must stress the cultural roots of our forefathers, that will lend dignity and make the black man cease to be ashamed of himself. We have to teach our people something about our cultural roots. We have to teach them something of their glorious civilizations before they were kidnapped by your grandfathers and brought over to this country. Once our people are taught about the glorious civilization that existed on the African continent, they wont any longer be ashamed of who they are. We will reach back and link ourselves to those roots, and this will make the feeling of dignity come into us; we will feel that as we lived in times gone by, we can in like manner today. If we had civilizations, cultures, societies, and nations hundreds of years ago, before you came and kidnapped us and brought us here, so we can have the same today. The restoration of our cultural roots and history will restore dignity to the black people in this country. Then we shall be satisfied in our own social circles; then we wont be trying to force ourselves into your social circles. So the social philosophy of Black Nationalism doesnt in any way involve any anti- anything. However, it does restore to the man who is being taunted his own self-respect. And the day that we are successful in making the black man respect himself as much as he now admires you, he will no longer be breathing down your neck every time you go buy a house somewhere to get away from him.

That is the political, social, and economic philosophy of Black Nationalism, and in order to bring it about, the program that we have in the Muslim Mosque, Incorporated, places an accent on youth. We are issuing a call for students across the country, from coast to coast, to launch a new study of the problem-not a study that is in any way guided or influenced by adults, but a study of their own. Thus we can get a new analysis of the problem, a more realistic analysis. After this new study and more realistic analysis, we are going to ask those same students (by students I mean young people, who having less of a stake to lose, are more flexible and can be more objective) for a new approach to the problem.

Already we have begun to get responses from so- called Negro students from coast to coast, who arent actually religiously inclined, but who are nonetheless strongly sympathetic to the approach used by Black Nationalism, whether it be social, economic, or political. And with this new approach and with these new ideas we think that we may open up a new era here in this country. As that era begins to spread, people in this country-instead of sticking under your nose or crying for civil rights-will begin to expand their civil rights plea to a plea for human rights. And once the so-called Negro in this country forgets the whole civil rights issue and begins to realize that human rights are far more important and broad than civil rights, he wont be going to Washington, D.C., anymore, to beg Uncle Sam for civil rights. He will take his plea for human rights to the United Nations. There wont be a violation of civil rights anymore. It will be a violation of human rights. Now at this moment, the governments that are in the United Nations cant step in, cant involve themselves with Americas domestic policy. But the day the black man turns from civil rights to human rights, he will take his case into the halls of the United Nations in the same manner as the people in Angola, whose human rights have been violated by the Portuguese in South Africa.

Youll find that you are entering an era now where the black man in this country has ceased to think domestically, or within the bounds of the United States, and hes beginning to see that this is a world-wide issue and that he needs help from outside. We need help from our brothers in Africa who have won their independence. And when we begin to show them our thinking has expanded to an international scale, they will step in and help us, and youll find that Uncle Sam will be in a most embarrassing position. So the only way Uncle Sam can stop us is to get some civil rights passed-right now! For if he cant take care of his domestic dirt, its going to be put before the eyes of the world. Then youll find that youll have nobody on your side, whatsoever, other than, perhaps, a few of those Uncle Toms-and theyve already out-lived their time.

* * *

Moderator: I suggest we follow this format: We will have reactions and responses to what Malcolm X has said from the members of the panel, then give Malcolm X a chance to discuss their views. The first member of the panel to address us will be Professor James Q. Wilson, who has written an important book about Negro politics in Chicago. At present, Professor Wilson is Associate Professor of Government at Harvard and also Director of the Joint Center for Urban Studies. The second speaker this evening will be Dr. Martin L. Kilson. Dr. Kilson is Lecturer on Government at Harvard, and will soon publish his first book, Political Change in a West African Slate.

[Panel members responnd.]

Moderator: Mr. X, I wonder if youd like to reply to either Professor Wilson or Dr. Kilson.

Malcolm X: As I said in my opening statement, Im not a student of politics nor a politician, but I did learn a lot listening to the speakers. Mr. Wilson pointed out very decisively that politics wont solve the problem...this is what I got out of what he said...the politicians cant do it. In fact I can see now why the Honorable Elijah Muhammad said that complete separation is the only answer. For what I got from what he was saying is that Uncle Sam sees no hope within his political system of solving this problem that has become so complex that you can hardly even describe it. And this is why I said that we are issuing a call to youth, primarily, to get some new ideas and a new direction. The adults are more confused than the problem itself. It will take a whole generation of new people to approach this problem.

I would not like to leave the impression that I have ever, in any way, proposed a Negro party. Whoever entertains that thought is very much misinformed. We have never at any time advocated any kind of Negro party. The idea that I have been trying to convey is that Black Nationalism is our political philosophy. I didnt mention party. By Black Nationalism I meant a political philosophy that makes the black man more conscious of the importance of his doing something to control his own destiny. The political philosophy maintained now by most black people in this country seems to me to leave their destiny in the hands of someone who doesnt even look like them. So, you see, the political philosophy of Black Nationalism has nothing to do with party. It is designed to make the black man develop some kind of consciousness or awareness of the importance of his shaping his own future, instead of leaving it to some segregationists in Washington, D.C., who come from the North as well as from the South. In pointing out that we are putting an accent on youth, we wish to let you know that our minds are wide open. We dont think we have the answer, but we are open-minded enough to try to seek the answer not from these old hicks, whom I think have gone astray, but from the youth. For the young may approach the problem from a new slant and perhaps come up with something that nobody else has thought of yet.

In reply to Dr. Kilson, who pointed out how Marcus Garvey failed: Marcus Garvey failed only because his movement was infiltrated by Uncle Toms, sent in by the government as well as by other bodies to maneuver him into a position wherein the government might have him sent to Atlanta, Georgia, put in a penitentiary, then deported, and his movement destroyed. But Marcus Garvey never failed. Marcus Garvey was the one who gave a sense of dignity to the black people in this country. He organized one of the largest mass movements that ever existed in this country; and his entire philosophy of organizing and attracting Negroes was based on going-back-to-Africa, which proves that the only mass movement which ever caught on in this country was designed to appeal to what the masses really felt. More of them then preferred to go back home than to stay here in this country and continue to beg the power structure for something they knew they would never get. Garvey did not fail. Indeed, it was Marcus Garveys philosophy that inspired the Nkrumah fight for the independence of Ghana from the colonialism that was imposed on it by England. It is also the same Black Nationalism that has been spreading throughout Africa and that has brought about the emergence of the present independent African states. Garvey never failed. Garvey planted the seed which has popped up in Africa-everywhere you look, and although theyre still trying to stamp it out in Angola, in South Africa, and in other places, you will soon be able to see for yourselves whether or not Garvey failed. He may have failed in America, but he didnt fail in Africa; and when Africa succeeds, youll find that you have a new situation on your hands here in America.

I cant abide anyone referring to Black Nationalism as any kind of racism. Whenever white people get together they dont call it racism. The European Common Market is for Europeans; it excludes everyone else. In that case you dont call it racism; all the numerous blocks and groups and syndicates and cliques that the Western nations have formed are never referred to as racist. But when we dark people want to form some kind of united effort to solve our problem, either you or somebody you have brainwashed comes up with racism. We dont call it racism; we call it brotherhood. To note just one more small point: it is true that a large middle-class group of so-called Negroes has developed in this country, and you may think that these Negroes are satisfied or that they want to stay here because they have a stake. This is the popular misconception. The middle-class Negro in this country is almost more frustrated, disillusioned, and disenchanted than the Negro in the alley. Why? The Negro in the alley does not even think about integrating with you because he knows that he hasnt enough money to go where you are in control. So it doesnt enter his mind; hes less frustrated when he knows its impossible. But this middle-class Negro, sharp as a tack with his Harvard accent and with his pocket full of your money, thinks he should be able to go everywhere. Indeed, he should be able to go everywhere, so he will try.

Moderator: I will take questions from the floor.

Question: I have a question for Mr. Malcolm X. What is your view of the Freedom Now Party, which is certainly a third party movement? How do you feel about this alternative way of solving the Negro problem?

Malcolm X: I have met Negroes of the Freedom Now Party, all of whom seem to be very militant. They are young and militant and less likely to compromise. For these reasons it offers more hope than other alternatives being dangled in front of the so-called Negro. I couldnt say I would endorse the Freedom Now Party, but my mind is wide open to anything that will help gain progress. In addition, members of the Freedom Now Party seem to be more flexible than members of the Democratic and Republican parties. I dont think anything can be worse than the Democrats and Republicans.

Question: Mr. Malcolm X, do you support a bloody revolution and, if not, what kind do you have in mind, especially when the Negro is at a numerical disadvantage?

Malcolm X: Dont tell me about a six-to-one disadvantage. I agree it is a six-to-one disadvantage when you think in terms of America. But in the world the nonwhite people have you at an eleven-to-one disadvantage. We black people consider ourselves a part of that vast body of dark people who outnumber the whites, and we dont regard ourselves as a minority.

Question: Mr. Malcolm X, you said the type of civil rights agitation we see now has not altered the morality of white people. Could you comment on that?

Malcolm X: When exposed to the methods of civil rights groups, whites remain complacent. You couldnt appeal to their ethical sense or their sense of legality. But, on the, other hand, when they hear the analysis of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, whites become more sharply attuned to the problem. They become more conscious of the problem. You can appeal to what intelligence whites have. Let the black man speak his mind so that the white man really knows how he feels. At the same time, let the white man speak his mind. Let everyone put his facts on the table. Once you put the facts on the table, its possible to arrive at a solution.

The civil rights movement has put the white man in a position where he has to take a stand contrary to his intelligence. Many whites who do not support integration are afraid to say so when face to face with a Negro for fear the Negro will call him a bigot or a racist. So that even though a white in his intelligence can see that this forced integration will never work, hes afraid to say this to a black man; whereas if the white could speak his mind to the black man, he might wake that man up. My contention is that the approach used by the Honorable Elijah Muhammad is more realistic. A white man can speak his mind to a Muslim, and a Muslim is going to speak his mind to a white man. Once you establish this honest, sincere, realistic communication, youll get a solution to the problem. But dont you give me that you love me and make me do the same thinking when theres nothing in our backgrounds nor anything around us which in any way gives either of us reason to love each other. Lets be real!
Asalaam Alaikum. I suppose I should take time to explain what I mean when I say Asalaam Alaikum. Actually, its an expression that means peace, and its one that is always given to ones brother or to ones sister. It only means peace be unto you. So, when I say Asalaam Alaikum or Salaam Alaikum and others reply, Alaikum Salaam, why, theyre just returning the peace. It means were all at peace with one another, as brothers and sisters.

Now, brothers and sisters, first I want to thank those of you who have taken the time to come through that snow, which almost turned me back myself, and come out where we can try and put our heads together and get a better understanding of what is going on, what weve been through and what were all concerned about. As Sister Sharon has already pointed out, and I think she did so beautifully, during recent years our people have been struggling for some kind of relief from the conditions were confronted by.

When you go back over the period of struggle, I think it would be agreed that weve gone through different patterns of struggle, that weve struggled in different ways. Each way that we tried never produced what we were looking for. If it had been productive, we would have continued along that same way. Weve tried probably more different methods than any people. But at the same time, I think weve tried more wrong methods than any other people, because most others have gotten more freedom than we have. Everywhere you look, people get their freedom faster than we do. They get more respect and recognition faster than we do. We get promises, but we never get the real thing. And primarily because we have yet to learn the proper tactic or strategy or method to bring freedom into existence.

I think that one of the things that has caused our people in this country to try so many methods is that times have changed so rapidly. What would be proper ten years ago would not have been proper seven years ago, or five years ago, or three years ago. Times change so quickly that if you and I dont keep up with the times, well find ourselves with an umbrella in our hand, over our head, when the sun is out. Or well find ourselves standing in the rain, with the umbrella inside the door. If we dont keep up with whats going on, we will not be able to display the type of intelligence that will show the world we know what time it is and that we know what is happening around us.

Several persons have asked me recently, since Ive been back, What is your program? I purposely, to this day, have not in any way mentioned what our program is, because there will come a time when we will unveil it so that everybody will understand it. Policies change, and programs change, according to time. But objective never changes. You might change your method of achieving the objective, but the objective never changes. Our objective is complete freedom, complete justice, complete equality, by any means necessary. That never changes. Complete and immediate recognition and respect as human beings, that doesnt change, thats what all of us want. I dont care what you belong to, you still want that recognition and respect as a human being. But you have changed your methods from time to time on how you go about getting it. The reason you change your method is that you have to change your method according to time and conditions that prevail. And one of the conditions that prevails on this earth right now, that we know too little about, is our relationship with the freedom struggle of people all over the world.a

Here in America, we have always thought that we were struggling by ourselves, and most Afro-Americans will tell you just that were a minority. By thinking were a minority, we struggle like a minority. We struggle like were an underdog. We struggle like all of the odds are against us. This type of struggle takes place only because we dont yet know where we fit in the scheme of things. Weve been maneuvered out of a position where we could rightly know and understand where we fit into the scheme of things. Its impossible for you and me to know where we stand until we look around on this entire earth. Not just look around in Harlem or New York, or Mississippi, or America, we have got to look all around this earth. We dont know where we stand until, we know where America stands. You dont know where you stand in America until you know where America stands in the world. We dont know where you and I stand in this context, known to us as America, until we know where America stands in the world context. When you and I are inside of America and look at America, she looks big and bad and invincible. Oh, yes, and when we approach her in that context, we approach her as beggars, with our hat in our hands. As Toms, actually, only in the twentieth century sense, but still as Toms. While if we understand whats going on this earth and whats going on in the world today, and fit America into that context, we find out shes not so bad, after all; shes not very invincible. And when you find out shes not invincible, you dont approach her like youre dealing with someone whos invincible.

As a rule, up to now, the strategy of America has been to tuck all of our leaders up into her dress, and besiege them with money, with prestige, with praise, and make them jump, and tell them what to tell us. And they always tell us were the underdog, and that we dont have a chance, and that we should do it nonviolently and carefully; otherwise, well get hurt or well get wasted. We dont buy that.

Number one, we want to know what are we? How did we get to be what we are? Where did we come from? How did we come from there? Who did we leave behind? Where was it that we left them behind, and what are they doing over there where we used to be? This is something that we have not been told. We have been brought over here and isolatedyou know the funniest thing about that: they accuse us of introducing separation and isolation. No one is more isolated than you and I. Theres no system on earth more capable of thoroughly separating and isolating a people than this system that they call the democratic system; and you and I are the best proof of it, the best example of it. We were separated from our people, and have been isolated here for a long time.

So thoroughly has this been done to us that now we dont even know that there is somebody else that looks like we do. When we see them, we look at them like theyre strangers. And when we see somebody that doesnt look anything like us, we call them our friends. Thats a shame. It shows you what has been done to us. Yes, I mean our own peoplewe see our people come here who look exactly like we do, our twins, cant tell them apart, and we say, Those are foreigners. Yet were getting our heads busted trying to snuggle up to somebody who not only doesnt look like us, but doesnt even smell like us.

So you can see the importance of these meetings on Sunday nights during the past two or three weeks, and for a couple more weeks. It is not so much to spell out any program; you cant give a people a program until they realize they need one, and until they realize that all existing programs arent programs that are going to produce productive results. So what we would like to do on Sunday nights is to go into our problem, and just analyze and analyze and analyze; and question things that you dont understand, so we can at least try and get a better picture of what faces us. I, for one, believe that if you give people a thorough understanding of what it is that confronts them, and the basic causes that produce it, theyll create their own program; and when the people create a program, you get action.

When these leaders create programs, you get no action. The only time you see them is when the people are exploding. Then the leaders are shot into the situation and told to control things. You cant show me a leader that has set off an explosion. No, they come and contain the explosion. They say, Dont get rough, you know, do the smart thing. This is their role theyre there just to restrain you and me, to restrain the struggle, to keep it in a certain groove, and not let it get out of control. Whereas you and I dont want anybody to keep us from getting out of control. We want to get out of control. We want to smash anything that gets in our way that doesnt belong there.

Listen to the last part of what I said: I didnt just say we want to smash anything that gets in our way. I said we want to smash anything that gets in our way that doesnt belong there. You see, I had to give you the whole thing, because when you read it, youll hear were going to smash up everybody. No, I didnt say that. I said well smash up anything that gets in the way that doesnt belong there. I mean that. If it doesnt belong there, its worthy to be smashed. This country practices that power. This country smashes anything that gets in its way. It crushes anything that gets in its way. And since were Americans, they tell us, well, well do it the American way. Well smash anything that gets in our way.

This is the type of philosophy that we want to express among our people. We dont need to give them a program, not yet. First, give them something to think about. If we give them something to think about, and start them thinking in a way that they should think, theyll see through all this camouflage thats going on right now. Its just a show the result of a script written by somebody else. The people will take that script and tear it up and write one for themselves. And you can bet that when you write the script for yourself, youre always doing something different than youd be doing if you followed somebody elses script.

So, brothers and sisters, the thing that you and I must have an understanding of is the role thats being played in world affairs today, number one, by the continent of Africa; number two, by the people on that continent; number three, by those of us who are related to the people on that continent, but who, by some quirk in our own history, find ourselves today here in the Western hemisphere. Always bear that in mind that our being in the Western hemisphere differs from anyone else, because everyone else here came voluntarily. Everyone that you see in this part of the world got on a boat and came here voluntarily; whether they were immigrants or what have you, they came here voluntarily. So they dont have any real squawk, because they got what they were looking for. But you and I can squawk because we didnt come here voluntarily. We didnt ask to be brought here. We were brought here forcibly, against. our will, and in chains. And at no time since we have been here, have they even acted like they wanted us here. At no time. At no time have they even tried to pretend that we were brought here to be citizens. Why, they dont even pretend. So why should we pretend?

Look at the continent of Africa today and see what position it occupies on this earth, and you realize that theres a tussle going on between East and West. It used to be between America and the West and Russia, but theyre not tussling with each other any more. Kennedy made a satellite out of Russia. He put Khrushchev in his pocket; yes, he did, lost him his job. The tussle now is between America and China. In the camp of the West, America is foremost. Most other Western nations are satellites to America. England is an American satellite. All of them are satellites, perhaps with the exception of France. France wants America to be her satellite. You never can tell what the future might bring. Better nations than this have fallen, if you read history. Most of the European Communist nations are still satelliting around Russia. But in Asia, China is the center of power.

Among Asian countries, whether they are communist, socialist, you dont find any capitalist countries over there too much nowadays. Almost every one of the countries that has gotten independence has devised some kind of socialistic system, and this is no accident. This is another reason why I say that you and I here in America, who are looking for a job, who are looking for better housing, looking for a better education, before you start trying to be incorporated, or integrated, or disintegrated, into this capitalistic system, should look over there and find out what are the people who have gotten their freedom adopting to provide themselves with better housing and better education and better food and better clothing.

None of them are adopting the capitalistic system because they realize they cant. You cant operate a capitalistic system unless you are vulturistic; you have to have someone elses blood to suck to be a capitalist. You show me a capitalist, Ill show you a bloodsucker. He cannot be anything but a bloodsucker if hes going to be a capitalist. Hes got to get it from somewhere other than himself, and thats where he gets it, from somewhere or someone other than himself. So, when we look at the African continent, when we look at the trouble thats going on between East and West, we find that the nations in Africa are developing socialistic systems to solve their problems. Theres one thing that Martin Luther King mentioned at the Armory the other night, which I thought was most significant. I hope he really understood what he was saying. He mentioned that while he was in some of those Scandinavian countries he saw no poverty. There was no unemployment, no poverty. Everyone was getting education, everyone had decent housing, decent whatever they needed to exist. But why did he mention those countries on his list as different?

This is the richest country on earth and theres poverty, theres bad housing, theres slums, theres inferior education. And this is the richest country on earth. Now, you know, if those countries that are poor can come up with a solution to their problems so that theres no unemployment, then instead of you running downtown picketing city hall, you should stop and find out what they do over there to solve their problems. This is why the man doesnt want you and me to look beyond Harlem or beyond the shores of America. As long as you dont know whats happening on the outside, youll be all messed up dealing with this man on the inside. I mean what they use to solve the problem is not capitalism. What they are using to solve their problem in Africa and Asia is not capitalism. So what you and I should do is find out what they are using to get rid of poverty and all the other negative characteristics of a rundown society.

Africa is strategically located, geographically between East and West; its the most valuable piece of property involved in the struggle between East and West. You cant get to the East without going past it, and cant get from the East to West without going past it. It sits right there between all of them. It sits snuggled into a nest between Asia and Europe; it can reach either one. None of the natural resources that are needed in Europe that they get from Asia can get to Europe without coming either around Africa, over Africa, or in between the Suez Canal which is sitting at the tip of Africa. She can cut off Europes bread. She can put Europe to sleep overnight, just like that. Because shes in a position to; the African continent is in a position to do this. But they want you and me to think Africa is a jungle, of no value, of no consequence. Because they also know that if you knew how valuable it was, youd realize why theyre over there killing our people. And youd realize that its not for some kind of humanitarian purpose or reason.

Also, Africa as a continent is important because of its tropical climate. Its so heavily vegetated you can take any section of Africa and use modern agricultural methods and turn that section alone into the breadbasket for the world. Almost any country over there can feed the whole continent, if it only had access to people who had the technical know-how to bring into that area modern methods of agriculture. Its rich. A jungle is only a place thats heavily vegetated, the soil is so rich and the climate is so good that everything grows, and it doesnt grow in season, it grows all the time. All the time is the season. That means it can grow anything, produce anything.

Added to its richness and its strategic position geographically is the fact of the existence of the Suez Canal and the Strait of Gibraltar. Those two narrow straits can cut off from Europe anything and everything Europe needs. All of the oil that runs Europe goes through the Suez Canal, up the Mediterranean Sea to places like Greece and Italy and Southern Spain and France and along through there; or through the Strait of Gibraltar and around on into England. And they need it. They need access through the Suez. When Nasser took over the Suez, they almost died in Europe. It scared them to death, why? Because Egypt is in Africa, in fact, Egypt is in both Africa and Asia...Before the Suez Canal was built, it was all one, you couldnt really make a distinction between Africa and Asia. It was all one. When President Nasser took the Suez Canal, that meant that for the first time the Suez Canal was under the complete jurisdiction of an African nation, and it meant that other nations had to cater to this African nation if they wanted to survive, if they didnt want their oil and other sources of supply cut off. Immediately this had an effect on European attitudes and European economic measures. They began to try and devise new means, new routes, to get the things that they needed.

Another reason the continent is so important is because of its gold. It has some of the largest deposits of gold on earth, and diamonds. Not only the diamonds you put on your. finger and in your ear, but industrial diamonds, diamonds that are needed to make machines, machines that cant function or cant run unless they have these diamonds. These industrial diamonds play a major role in the entire industrialization of the European nations, and without these diamonds their industry would fall.

You and I usually know of diamonds for rings, because those are the only diamonds we get close to, or the only diamonds within our line of thinking. We dont think in terms of diamonds for other uses. Or baseball diamonds, some of us only get that far.

Not only diamonds, but also cobalt. Cobalt is one of the most valuable minerals on this earth today, and I think Africa is one of the only places where it is found. They use it in cancer treatment, plus they use it in this nuclear field that youve heard so much about. Cobalt and uranium, the largest deposits are right there on the African continent. And this is what the man is after. The man is after keeping you over here worrying about a cup of coffee, while hes over there in your motherland taking control over minerals that have so much value they make the world go around. While you and I are still walking around over here, yes, trying to drink some coffee with a cracker. Its one of the largest sources of iron and bauxite and lumber and even oil, and Western industry needs all of these minerals in order to survive. All of these natural minerals are needed by the Western industrialists in order for their industry to keep running at the clip that its been used to. Can we prove it? Yes. You know that France lost her French West African possessions, Belgium lost the Congo, England lost Nigeria and Ghana and some of the other English-speaking areas; France also lost Algeria, or the Algerians took Algeria.

As soon as these European powers lost their African possessions, Belgium had an economic crisis, the same year she turned the Congo loose. She had to rearrange her entire economy and her economic methods had to be revised, because she had lost possession of the source of most of her raw materials, raw materials that she got almost free, almost with no price or output whatsoever. When she got into a position where she didnt have access to these free raw materials anymore, it affected her economy. It affected the French economy. It affected the British economy. It drove all of these European countries to the point where they had to come together and form whats known as the European Common Market. Prior to that, you wouldnt hear anything about a European Common Market. Being the gateway to Southwest Africa, Southern Rhodesia, Basutoland, Swaziland, and South Africa, the Congo is a country on the African continent which is so strategically located geographically that if it were to fall into the hands of a real dyed-in-the-wool African nationalist, he could then make it possible for African soldiers to train in the Congo for the purpose of invading Angola. When they invade Angola, that means Angola must fall, because there are more Africans than there are Portuguese, and they just couldnt control Angola any longer. And if the Congo fell into good hands, other than Tshombe, then it would mean. that Angola would fall, Southern Rhodesia would fall, Southwest Africa would fall and South Africa would fall. And thats the only way they would fall.

When these countries fall, it would mean that the source of raw material, natural resources, some of the richest mineral deposits on earth, would then be taken away from the European economy. And without free access to this, the economy of Europe wouldnt be worth two cents. All of your European countries would be of no more importance than a country like Norway, which is all right for Norwegians, but has no influence beyond that. Its just another country stuck up some place in the northern part, like Sweden and some of those places. Every European country would be just as insignificant as the smallest insignificant country in Europe right now if they lost the rest of Africa. Because the rest of Africa thats still colonized is the part of the African continent thats still backing up the European economy. And if the economy of Europe was to sink any farther, it would really wash away the American economy. American economy can never be any stronger than the European economy because both of them are one. Its one and the same economy.. They are brothers. I say this because it is necessary for you and me to understand what is at stake. You cant understand what is going on in Mississippi if you dont understand what is going on in the Congo. And you cant really be interested in whats going on in Mississippi if youre not also interested in whats going on in the Congo. Theyre both the same. The same interests are at stake. The same sides are drawn up, the same schemes are at work in the Congo that are at work in Mississippi. The same stake, no difference whatsoever.

Another frightening thing for this continent and the European continent is the fact that the Africans are trying to industrialize. One of the most highly industrialized African nations is Egypt. They have had a limited source of power up to now, but they are building a dam in upper Egypt, where the black Egyptians live. I was there, I took some pictures Im going to show you some movies, probably on the first Sunday in January, a week from next Sunday. The Aswan Dam is something that everybody should see. The Aswan is being built on the Nile in the heart of the desert, surrounded by mountains. One of the most outstanding things about this dam isnt so much its miraculous technical aspects, but the human aspects.
 When you build a dam in an area where theres already vegetation, thats one thing. But this dam is being built in an area where theres no vegetation. Once this river is dammed, it will create a lake in the middle of the desert which will set up a water cycle, rain, you know, clouds, and all of that stuff, and it will turn the desert into a civilization, into a very fertile valley. In order for this artificial lake to be built in that way, from that dam, it washed away the homes of the Nubians, people who look just like you and I do, who have been living there for thousands of years. They had to replace them, they had to transplant them from where they were living for thousands of years to another area.

This in itself was an operation that would hold you spellbound if you could see all the aspects of it. It meant taking a people from one place and putting them in another place. The place where they had been was antiquated. Their methods, their customs, their homes were thousands of years old. But overnight these people, who lived that far in the past, were taken to new cities that had been built by the government. Modern cities, where they had modern schools, modern rooms in which to live, and modern hospitals. When you go into these new cities that are Nubian villages, the first thing you always see is a mosque. Their religion is Islam, theyre Muslims.

The Egyptian government, the revolutionary government, differs from most revolutions in that its one of the few revolutions that have taken place where religion has not been minimized. In most revolutions, religion is immediately de-emphasized. Eventually that revolution loses something. Always. But the thing about the Egyptian revolution was that it never de-emphasized the importance of religion. In these new cities, the first thing they build is a mosque, so people can practice their religion. Then they build schools so the people can be educated free; and then they build hospitals. They believe that the religious aspect keeps the people spiritually and morally balanced, and then everyone should have the best education and free hospitalization.

These new villages actually reflect the whole motive behind the Egyptian revolution. I found this quite interesting. I was there and could study it for two months. Its a balanced revolution. I go for revolution, but revolution should always do something for the people and it should always keep them balanced. You dont find anybody thats more revolutionary than those people over there in Egypt; theyre revolutionary, theyre involved in every revolution thats going on on the African continent right now.

So the Aswan Dam creates enough additional power to make it possible to step up or speed up the industrialization of that particular African nation. And as their industrialization is stepped up, it means that they can produce their own cars, their own tractors, their own tools, their own machinery, plus a lot of other things. Not only Egypt, but Ghana too. Ghana is building a dam, theyre damming the Volta River. Theres the Volta High Dam, and its being built for the purpose of increasing the power potential of Ghana, so that Ghana also can increase its industrial output.

As these African nations get in a position to increase their own power and to industrialize, what does it mean? It means that where they now are a market for American goods and Americas finished products, and a market for European finished products, when theyre able to finish their own products, they will be able to get their products cheaper because theyre putting their own raw materials into the finished products. Now the raw materials are taken from Africa, shipped all the way to Europe, used to feed the machines of the Europeans, and make jobs for them, and then turned around and sold back to the Africans as finished products. But when the African nations become industrialized, they can take their own products and stick them in the machines and finish them into whatever they want. Then they can live cheaper. The whole system will be a system with a high standard of living but a cheaper standard of living.

This standard of living automatically will threaten the standard of living in Europe because it will cut off the European market. European factories cant produce unless they have some place to market the products. American factories cant produce unless she has some place to market her products. It is for this reason that the European nations in the past have kept the nations in Latin America and in Africa and in Asia from becoming industrial powers. They keep the machinery and the ability to produce and manufacture limited to Europe and limited to America. Then this puts America and the Europeans in a position to control the economy of all other nations and keep them living at a low standard.

These people are beginning to see that. The Africans see it, the Latin Americans see it, the Asians see it. So when you hear them talking about freedom, theyre not talking about a cup of coffee with a cracker. No, theyre talking about getting in a position to feed themselves and clothe themselves and make these other things that, when you have them, make life worth living. So this is the way you and I have to understand the world revolution thats taking place right now.

When you understand the motive behind the world revolution, the drive behind the African and the drive behind the Asian, then you get some of that drive yourself. Youll be driving for real. The man downtown knows the difference between when youre driving for real and when youre driving not for real. As long as you keep asking about coffee, he doesnt have to worry about you; he can send you to Brazil. So these dams being set up over there in different parts of the continent are putting African nations in a position to have more power, to become more industrial and also to be self- sustained and self-sufficient.

In line with that: in the past it was the world bank, controlled again by Europeans and from Europe, that subsidized most of the effort that was being made by African nations and Asian nations to develop underdeveloped areas. But the African nations are now getting together and forming their own bank, the African bank. The details of it arent as much in my mind as I would like them to be, but when I was in Lagos, Nigeria, they were having a meeting there. It was among African bankers and African nations, and the Organization of African Unity, which is the best thing that has ever happened on the African continent, had taken up as part of its program the task of getting all of the African nations to pool their efforts in creating an African bank, so that there would be an internal bank in the internal African structure to which underdeveloped African nations can turn for financial assistance in projects that theyre trying to undertake that would be beneficial to the whole continent.

Politically, Africa as a continent, and the African people as a people, have the largest representation of any continent in the United Nations. Politically, the Africans are in a more strategic position and in a stronger position whenever a conference is taking place at the international level. Today, power is international, real power is international; today, real power is not local. The only kind of power that can help you and me is international power, not local power. Any power thats local, if its real power, is only a reflection or a part of that international power. If you think youve got some power, and it isnt in some way tied into that international thing, brother, dont get too far out on a limb.

If your power base is only here, you can forget it. You cant build a power base here. You have to have a power base among brothers and sisters. You have to have your power base among people who have something in common with you. They have to have some kind of cultural identity, or there has to be some relationship between you and your power base. When you build a power base in this country, youre building it where you arent in any way related to what you build it on. No, you have to have that base somewhere else. You can work here, but youd better put your base somewhere else. Dont put it in this mans hand. Any kind of organization that is based here cant be an effective organization. Anything youve got going for you, if the base is here, is not going to be effective. Your and my base must be at home, and this is not at home.

When you see that the African nations at the international level comprise the largest representative body and the largest force of any continent, why, you and I would be out of our minds not to identify with that power bloc. We would be out of our minds, we would actually be traitors to ourselves, to be reluctant or fearful to identify with people with whom we have so much in common. If it was a people who had nothing to offer, nothing to contribute to our well-being, you might be justified, even though they looked like we do; if there was no contribution to be made, you might be justified. But when you have people who look exactly like you, and you are catching hell, to boot, and you still are reluctant or hesitant or slow to identify with them, then you need to catch hell, yes. You deserve all the hell you get.

The African representatives, coupled with the Asians and Arabs, form a bloc thats almost impossible for anybody to contend with. The African-Asian-Arab bloc was the bloc that started the real independence movement among the oppressed peoples of the world. The first coming together of that bloc was at the Bandung conference. To show you the power of that bloc and the results that theyve gotten and how well the Europeans know it: on the African continent, when I was there, one thing I noticed was the twenty-four-hour-a-day effort being made in East Africa to turn the African against the Asian; and in West Africa to turn the African against the Arab; and in parts of Africa where there are no Asians or Arabs, to turn the Muslim African against the Christian African. When you go over there and study this thing, you can see that it is not something thats indigenous, its not a divisive situation thats indigenous to the African himself. But someone realizes that the power of the oppressed black, brown, red and yellow people began at the Bandung conference, which was a coalition between the Arab and the Asian and the African, and how much pressure theyve been able to put on the oppressor since then.

So, very shrewdly they have moved in. Now when you travel on the continent, you see the African in East Africa is being sicked on the Asian, theres a division taking place. And in West Africa hes being sicked on the Arab, theres a division taking place. And where the oppressor, this ingenious oppressor, diabolically ingenious, where he hasnt found an Asian to sic the African on, or an Arab to sic the African on, he uses the Muslim African against the Christian African. Or the one that believes in religion against the one that doesnt believe in religion. But the main thing hes doing is causing this division to in some way keep the African, the Arab and the Asian from beating up on him.

Hes doing the same thing in British Guyana. Hes got the black Guyanians down there fighting against the so-called Indians. Hes got them fighting each other. They didnt fight each other when the British were there in full control. If you notice, as long as the place was an old-style colony, no fight. But as soon as the British are supposed to be moving away, the black one starts fighting the red one. Why? This is no accident. If they didnt fight before, they dont need to fight now. Theres no reason for it. But their fighting each other keeps the man on top. The fact that he can turn one against the other keeps the man on top.

He does the same thing with you and me right here in Harlem. All day long. I turned on the radio last night. I heard them say, every hour on the hour, that James Farmer, the head of CORE, was going to Africa, Egypt and Israel. And they said the reason he was going was because he wanted to correct false statements made by black nationalist leader Malcolm X when he was over there. If I hadnt had this experience before, immediately I would have started blasting Farmer. But I called him up today. He said he didnt know what they were talking about. But why do they do it? They do it to make us fight each other. As long as were fighting each other, we cant get at the man who should be fought against from the start. Do you understand? Once we see the strategy that they use at the international level, then we can better understand the strategy that they use at the national and at the local level.

Lastly, I would like to point out my understanding of what I think is the position taken in African policy. Their policy, in a nutshell, is positive neutrality, non-alignment. They dont line up either way. Africa is for the Africans. And the Africans are for the Africans. The policy of the independent African states, by and large, is positive neutrality, non-alignment. Egypt is a good example. They take from East and West and dont take sides with either one. Nasser took everything Russia could give him, and then put all the communists in jail. Not that I mean the communists should necessarily have been put in jail. For the communist is a man, a capitalist is a man, and a socialist is a man. Well, if all of them are men, why should they be put in jail, unless one of them is committing a crime? And if being a communist or being a capitalist or being a socialist is a crime, first you have to study which of those systems is the most criminal. And then youll be slow to say which one should be in jail.
I cite that as an example just to show what this positive neutrality means: If you want to help us, help us; were still not with you. If you have a contribution to make to our development, do it. But that doesnt mean were with you or against you. Were neutral. Were for ourselves. Whatever is good for us, thats what were interested in. That doesnt mean were against you. But it does mean were for ourselves.

This is what you and I need to learn. You and I need to learn how to be positively neutral. You and I need to learn how to be non-aligned. And if you and I ever study the science of non-alignment, then youll find out that theres more power in non-alignment than there is alignment. In this country, its impossible for you to be aligned with either party. Either party that you align yourself with is suicide. Because both parties are criminal. Both parties are responsible for the criminal condition that exists. So you cant align yourself with a party.

What you can do is get registered so that you have power political potential. When you register your political potential, that means your gun is loaded. But just because its loaded, you dont have to shoot until you see a target that will be beneficial to you. If you want a duck, dont shoot when you see a bear; wait till you see a duck. And if you want a bear, dont shoot when see a duck; wait till you see a bear. Wait till you see what you want, then take aim and shoot!

What they do with you and me is tell us, Register and vote. Dont register and vote, register! Thats intelligent. Dont register and vote, you can vote for a dummy, you can vote for a crook, you can vote for another whod want to exploit you. Register means being in a position to take political action any time, any place and in any manner that would be beneficial to you and me; being in a position to take advantage of our position. Then well be in a position to be respected and recognized. But as soon as you get registered, and you want to be a Democrat or a Republican, you are aligning. And once you are aligning, you have no bargaining power, none whatsoever. Weve got a program we are going to launch, which will involve the absolute maximum registering of as many of our people as we can. But they will be registered as independents. And by being registered as independents, it means we can do whatever is necessary, wherever its necessary, and whenever the time comes. Do you understand?

So, I say in my conclusion, we have a lady that I want to introduce you to, who I think is one of the best freedom fighters in America today. Shes from Mississippi, and youve got to be a freedom fighter to even live in Mississippi. Youve got to be a freedom fighter to live anywhere in this country, but especially Mississippi. This woman has been in the forefront of the struggle in Mississippi. I was on a program with her this afternoon. As I mentioned today, and youll probably read about it tomorrow; theyll blow it up, and out of context, what we need in this country, and I believe it with all my heart, and with all my mind, and with all my soul, is the same type of Mau Mau here that they had over there in Kenya. Dont you ever be ashamed of the Mau Mau. Theyre not to be ashamed of. They are to be proud of. Those brothers were freedom fighters.

Not only brothers, there were sisters over there. I met a lot of them. Theyre brave. They hug you and kiss you, glad to see you. In fact, if they were over here, theyd get this problem straightened up just like that. I read a little story once, and Mau Mau proved it. I read a story once where someone asked some group of people how many of them wanted freedom. They all put up their hand. Think there were about 300 of them. Then the person says, Well, how many of you are ready to kill anybody who gets in your way for freedom? About fifty put up their hands. And he told those fifty, You stand over here. That left 250 sitting who wanted freedom, but werent ready to kill for it. So he told this fifty, Now you wanted freedom and you said youd kill anybody whod get in your way. You see those 250? You get them first. Some of them are your own brothers and sisters and mothers and fathers. But theyre the ones who stand in the way of your freedom. Theyre afraid to do whatever is necessary to get it and theyll stop you from doing it. Get rid of them and freedom will come naturally.

I go for that. Thats what the Mau Mau learned. The Mau Mau realized that the only thing that was standing in the way of the independence of the African in Kenya was another African. So they started getting them one by one, all those Toms. One after another, theyd find another Uncle Tom African by the roadside. Today theyre free. The white man didnt even get involved, he got out of the way. Thats the same thing that will happen here. Weve got too many of our own people who stand in the way. Theyre too squeamish. They want to be looked upon as respectable Uncle Toms. They want to be looked upon by the white man as responsible. They dont want to be classified by him as extremist, or violent, or, you know, irresponsible. They want that good image. And nobody whos looking for a good image will ever be free. No, that kind of image doesnt get you free. Youve got to take something in your hand and say, Look, its you or me. And I guarantee you hell give you freedom then. Hell say, This man is ready for it. I said something in your hand, I wont define what I mean by something in your hand. I dont mean bananas.

So, we are honored to have with us tonight not only a freedom fighter, but some singers on that program today, I think theyre all here; I asked them to come out tonight because they sang one song that just knocked me out. Im not one who goes for We Shall Overcome. I just dont believe, were going to overcome, singing. If youre going to get yourself a .45 and start singing We Shall Overcome, Im with you. But Im not for singing that doesnt at the same time tell you how to get something to use after you get through singing. I realize Im saying some things that you think can get me in trouble, but, brothers, I was born in, trouble. I dont even care about trouble. Im interested in one thing alone, and thats freedom, by any means necessary. So Ill bring you now the countrys number one freedom-fighting woman.

[Mrs. Hamer speaks.]

Now you see why Mississippi is in trouble. And I hope that our brothers, especially our brothers here in Harlem, listened very well, very closely, to what I call one of this countrys foremost freedom fighters. You dont have to be a man to fight for freedom. All you have to do is be an intelligent human being. And automatically, your intelligence makes you want freedom so badly that youll do anything, by any means necessary, to get that freedom. And I want Mrs. Hamer to know that anything we can do to help them in Mississippi, were at their disposal. One of the things that we will definitely provide you with, because I think its the only real help that you can get down there: You can let those hooded people know that, from here on in, when they start taking the lives of innocent black people, we believe in tit for tat. If I were to go home and find some blood on the leg of one of my little girls, and my wife told me that a snake bit the child, Id go looking for the snake. And if I found the snake, I wouldnt necessarily take time to see if it had blood on its jaws. As far as Im concerned the snake is the snake. So if snakes dont want someone hunting snakes indiscriminately, I say that snakes should get together and clean out their snakey house. If snakes dont want people running around indiscriminately chopping off the heads of snakes, my advice to snakes would be to keep their house in order. I think you well understand what Im saying. Now those were twenty one snakes that killed those three brothers down there. Twenty-one of those are snakes. And there is no law in any society on earth that would hold it against anyone for taking the heads of those snakes.

Believe it, the whole world would honor you or honor anyone who did what the federal government refused to do. We should let them know that we believe in giving them what they deserve. There are brothers around the country right now, a lot of them, who feel like I do, a lot of them who feel like I do. Ive even met white students who feel that way. When they tell me that theyre liberal, I tell them, Great, go get me one of those snake heads. Im sincere about this. I think that there are many whites who are sincere, especially at the student level. They just dont know how to show their sincerity. They think that theyre showing sincerity by going down there and encouraging our people to be nonviolent. Thats not where its at. Since theyre white, they can get closer to whitey than we can. They can put on a sheet and walk right on into camp with the rest of them. Im telling you how to do it: Youre a liberal; get you a sheet. And get you something up under that sheet that you know how to use, and walk right on in that camp of sheeted people with the rest of them. And show how liberal you are. Ill come back and shake your hand all day long. Ill walk you around Harlem and tell everybody what a good white person you are. Because youve proved it. But I dont accept any nonviolent liberals. This doesnt mean that youve got to be violent; but it does mean that you cant be nonviolent.

First, brothers and sisters, I want to start by thanking you for taking the time to come out this evening and especially for the invitation for me to come up to Rochester and participate in this little informal discussion this evening on matters that are of common interest to all elements in the community, in the entire Rochester community. My reason for being here is to discuss the Black revolution that is going on, thats taking place on this earth, the manner in which its taking place on the African continent, and the impact that its having in Black communities, not only here in America but in England and in France and in other of the former colonial powers today.

Many of you probably read last week I made an effort to go to Paris and was turned away. And Paris doesnt turn anybody away. You know anybody is supposed to be able to go to France, its supposed to be a very liberal place. But France is having problems today that havent been highly publicized. And England is also having problems that havent been highly publicized, because Americas problems have been so highly publicized. But all of these three partners, or allies, have troubles in common today that the Black American, or Afro-American, isnt well enough up on.

And in order for you and me to know the nature of the struggle that you and I are involved in, we have to know not only the various ingredients involved at the local level and national level, but also the ingredients that are involved at the international level. And the problems of the Black man here in this country today have ceased to be a problem of just the American Negro or an American problem. It has become a problem that is so complex, and has so many implications in it, that you have to study it in its entire world, in the world context or in its international context, to really see it as it actually is. Otherwise you cant even follow the local issue, unless you know what part it plays in the entire international context. And when you look at it in that context, you see it in a different light, but you see it with more clarity.

And you should ask yourself why should a country like France be so concerned with a little insignificant American Negro that they would prohibit him from going there, when almost anybody else can go to that country whenever they desire. And its primarily because the three countries have the same problems. And the problem is this: That in the Western Hemisphere, you and I havent realized it, but we arent exactly a minority on this earth. In the Western Hemisphere there aretheres the people in Brazil, two thirds of the people in Brazil are dark-skinned people, the same as you and I. They are people of African origin, African ancestryAfrican background. And not only in Brazil, but throughout Latin America, the Caribbean, the United States, and Canada, you have people here who are of African origin.

Many of us fool ourselves into thinking of Afro-Americans as those only who are here in the United States. America is North America, Central America, and South America. Anybody of African ancestry in South America is an Afro-American. Anybody in Central America of African blood is an Afro-American. Anybody here in North America, including Canada, is an Afro-American if he has African ancestryeven down in the Caribbean hes an Afro-American. So when I speak of the Afro-American, Im not speaking of just the 22 million of us who are here in the United States. But the Afro-American is that large number of people in the Western Hemisphere, from the southernmost tip of South America to the northernmost tip of North America, all of whom have a common heritage and have a common origin when you go back to the roots of these people.

Now, there are four spheres of influence in the Western Hemisphere, where Black people are concerned. Theres the Spanish influence, which means that Spain formerly colonized a certain area of the Western Hemisphere. Theres the French sphere of influence, which means that area that she formerly colonized. The area that the British formerly colonized, and then those of us who are in the United States.

The area that was formerly colonized by the Spanish is commonly referred to as Latin America. They have many dark-skinned people there, of African ancestry. The area which the French colonized here in the Western Hemisphere is largely referred to as the French West Indies. And the area that the British colonized are those that are commonly referred to as the British West Indies, and also Canada. And then again, theres the United States. So we have these four different classifications of Black people, or nonwhite people, here in the Western Hemisphere.

Because of the poor economy of Spain, and because it has ceased to be an influence on the world scene as it formerly was, not very many of the people fromnot very many of the black-skinned people from the Spanish sphere of influence migrate to Spain. But because of the high standard of living in France and England, you find many of the Black people from the British West Indies have been migrating to Great Britain, many of the Black people from the French West Indies migrate to France, and then you and I are already here.

So it means that the three major allies, the United States, Britain, and France, have a problem today that is a common problem. But you and I are never given enough information to realize that they have a common problem. And that common problem is the new mood that is reflected in the overall division of the Black people within continental France, within the same sphere of England, and also here in the United States. So thatand this mood has been changing to the same degree that the mood on the African continent has been changing. So when you find the African revolution taking place, and by African revolution I mean the emergence of African nations into independence that has been going on for the past ten or twelve years, has absolutely affected the mood of the Black people in the Western Hemisphere. So much so that when they migrate to England, they pose a problem for the English. And when they migrate to France, they pose a problem for the French. And when theyalready here in the Statesbut when they awaken, and this same mood is reflected in the Black man in the States, then it poses a problem to the white man here in America.

And dont you think that the problem that the white man in America has is unique. France is having the same problem. And Great Britain is having the same problem. But the only difference between the problem in France and Britain and here is there have been many Black leaders that have risen up here in the Western Hemisphere, in the United States, that have created so much sort of militancy that has frightened the American whites. But that has been absent in France and England. And it has only been recently that the American Negro community and the British West Indian community, along with the African community in France, have begun to organize among themselves, and its frightening France to death. And the same thing is happening in England. It isup until recently it was disorganized completely. But recently, the West Indians in England, along with the African community in England, along with the Asians in England began to organize and work in coordination with each other, in conjunction with each other. And this has posed England a very serious problem.

So I had to give you that background, in order for you to understand some of the current problems that are developing here on this earth. And in no time can you understand the problems between Black and white people here in Rochester or Black and white people in Mississippi or Black and white people in California, unless you understand the basic problem that exists between Black and white people not confined to the local level, but confined to the international, global level on this earth today. When you look at it in that context, youll understand. But if you only try to look at it in the local context, youl1 never understand. You have to see the trend that is taking place on this earth. And my purpose for coming here tonight is to try and give you as up-to-date an understanding of it all as is possible.

As many of you know, I left the Black Muslim movement and during the summer months, I spent five of those months on thein the Middle East and on the African continent. During this time I visited many countries, first of which was Egypt, and then Arabia, then Kuwait, Lebanon, Sudan, Kenya, Ethiopia, Zanzibar, Tanganyikawhich is now TanzaniaNigeria, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Algeria. And then the five months that I was away I had an opportunity to hold lengthy discussions with President Nasser in Egypt, President Julius Nyerere in Tanzania, Jomo Kenyatta in Kenya, Milton Obote in Uganda, Azikiwe in Nigeria, Nkrumah in Ghana, and Sekou Toure in Guinea. And during conversations with these men, and other Africans on that continent, there was much information exchanged that definitely broadened my understanding, and I feel, broadened my scope. For since coming back from over there, I have had no desire whatsoever to get bogged down in any picayune arguments with any bird-brained or small-minded people who happen to belong to organizations, based upon facts that are very misleading and dont get you anywhere when you have problems as complex as ours that are trying to get solved.

So Im not here tonight to talk about some of these movements that are clashing with each other. Im here to talk about the problem thats in front of all of us. And to do it in a very informal way. I never like to be tied down to a formal method or procedure when talking to an audience, because I find that usually the conversation that Im involved in revolves around race, or things racial, which is not my fault. I didnt create the race problem. And you know, I didnt come to America on the Mayflower or at my own volition. Our people were brought here involuntarily, against our will. So if we pose the problem now, they shouldnt blame us for being here. They brought us here.

One of the reasons I feel that it is best to remain very informal when discussing this type of topic, when people are discussing things based on race, they have a tendency to be very narrow-minded and to get emotional and all involved in , especially white people. I have found white people that usually are very intelligent, until you get them to talking about the race problem. Then they get blind as a bat and want you to see what they know is the exact opposite of the truth.

So what I would rather we try and do is be very informal, where we can relax and keep an open mind, and try and form the pattern or the habit of seeing for ourselves, hearing for ourselves, thinking for ourselves, and then we can come to an intelligent judgment for ourselves.

To straighten out my own position, as I did earlier in the day at Colgate, Im a Muslim, which only means that my religion is Islam. I believe in God, the Supreme Being, the creator of the universe. This is a very simple form of religion, easy to understand. I believe in one God. Its just a whole lot better. But I believe in one God, and I believe that that God had one religion, has one religion, always will have one religion. And that that God taught all of the prophets the same religion, so there is no argument about who was greater or who was better: Moses, Jesus, Muhammad, or some of the others. All of them were prophets who came from one God. They had one doctrine, and that doctrine was designed to give clarification of humanity, so that all of humanity would see that it was one and have some kind of brotherhood that would be practiced here on this earth. I believe in that.

I believe in the brotherhood of man. But despite the fact I that I believe in the brotherhood of man, I have to be a realist and realize that here in America were in a society that doesnt practice brotherhood. It doesnt practice what it preaches. It preaches brotherhood, but it doesnt practice brotherhood. And because this society doesnt practice brotherhood, those of us who are Muslimthose of us who left the Black Muslim movement and regrouped as Muslims, in a movement based upon orthodox Islamwe believe in the brotherhood of Islam.

But we also realize that the problem facing Black people in this country is so complex and so involved and has been here so long, unsolved, that it is absolutely necessary for us to form another organization. Which we did, which is a nonreligious organization in whichis known as the Organization of Afro-American Unity, and it is so structured organizationally to allow for active participation of any Afro-American, any Black American, in a program that is designed to eliminate the negative political, economic, and social evils that our people are confronted by in this society.

And we have that set up because we realize that we have to fight against the evils of a society that has failed to produce brotherhood for every member of that society. This in no way means that were anti-white, anti-blue, anti-green, or anti-yellow Were anti-wrong. Were anti-discrimination. Were anti-segregation. Were against anybody who wants to practice some form of segregation or discrimination against us because we dont happen to be a color thats acceptable to you...

We dont judge a man because of the color of his skin. We dont judge you because youre white; we dont judge you because youre black; we dont judge you because youre brown. We judge you because of what you do and what you practice. And as long as you practice evil, were against you. And for us, the mostthe worst form of evil is the evil thats based upon judging a man because of the color of his skin. And I dont think anybody here can deny that were living in a society that just doesnt judge a man according to his talents, according to his know-how, according to his possibilitybackground, or lack of academic background. This society judges a man solely upon the color of his skin. If youre white, you can go forward, and if youre Black, you have to fight your way every step of the way, and you still dont get forward.

We are living in a society that is by and large controlled by people who believe in segregation. We are living in a society that is by and large controlled by a people who believe in racism, and practice segregation and discrimination and racism. We believe in and I say that it is controlled, not by the well-meaning whites, but controlled by the segregationists, the racists. And you can see by the pattern that this society follows all over the world. Right now in Asia you have the American army dropping bombs on darkskinned people. You cant say thatits as though you can justify being that far from home, dropping bombs on somebody else. If you were next door, I could see it, but you cant go that far away from this country and drop bombs on somebody else and justify your presence over there, not with me.

Its racism. Racism practiced by America. Racism which involves a war against the dark-skinned people in Asia, another form of racism involving a war against the dark-skinned people in the Congo, as it involves a war against the dark-skinned people in Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, and Rochester, New York. So were not against people because theyre white. But were against those who practice racism. Were against those who drop bombs on people because their color happens to be of a different shade than yours. And because were against it, the press says were violent. Were not for violence. Were for peace. But the people that were up against are for violence. You cant be peaceful when youre dealing with them. They accuse us of what they themselves are guilty of. This is what the criminal always does. Theyll bomb you, then accuse you of bombing yourself. Theyll crush your skull, then accuse you of attacking him. This is what the racists have always done the criminal, the one who has criminal processes developed to a science. Their practice is criminal action. And then use the press to make you victimlook like the victim is the criminal, and the criminal is the victim. This is how they do it.

And you here in Rochester probably know more about this than anybody anywhere else. Heres an example of how they do. They take the press, and through the press, they beat the system, or through the white public, because the white public is divided. Some mean good, and some dont mean good. Some are well meaning, and some are not well meaning. This is true. You got some that are not well meaning, and some are well meaning. And usually those that are not well meaning outnumber those that are well meaning. You need a microscope to find those that are well meaning. So they dont like to do anything without the support of the white public. The racists, that are usually very influential in the society, dont make their move without first going to get public opinion on their side. So they use the press to get public opinion on their side.

When they want to suppress and oppress the Black community, what do they do? They take the statistics, and through the press, they feed them to the public. They make it appear that the role of crime in the Black community is higher than it is anywhere else. What does this do? This messagethis is a very skillful message used by racists to make the whites who arent racists think that the rate of crime in the Black community is so high. This keeps the Black community in the image of a criminal. It makes it appear that anyone in the Black community is a criminal. And as soon as this impression is given, then it makes it possible, or paves the way to set up a police-type state in the Black community, getting the full approval of the white public when the police come in, use all kind of brutal measures to suppress Black people, crush their skulls, sic dogs on them, and things of that type. And the whites go along with it. Because they think that everybody over theres a criminal anyway. This is whatthe press does this.

This is skill. This skill is calledthis is a science thats called image making. They hold you in check through this science of imagery. They even make you look down upon yourself, by giving you a bad image of yourself. Some of our own Black people who have eaten this image themselves and digested ituntil they themselves dont want to live in the Black community. They dont want to be around Black people themselves.

Its a science that they use, very skillfully, to make the criminal look like the victim, and to make the victim look like the criminal. Example: In the United States during the Harlem riots, I was in Africa, fortunately. During these riots, or because of these riots, or after the riots, again the press, very skillfully, depicted the rioters as hoodlums, criminals, thieves, because they were abducting some property.

Now mind you, it is true that property was destroyed. But look at it from another angle. In these Black communities, the economy of the community is not in the hands of the Black man. The Black man is not his own landlord. The buildings that he lives in are owned by someone else. The stores in the community are run by someone else. Everything in the community is out of his hands. He has no say-so in it whatsoever, other than to live there, and pay the highest rent for the lowest type boarding place, pays the highest prices for food, for the lowest grade of food. He is a victim of this, a victim of economic exploitation, political exploitation, and every other kind. Now, hes so frustrated, so pent-up, so much explosive energy within him, that he would like to get at the one whos exploiting him. But the one whos exploiting him doesnt live in his neighborhood. He only owns the house. He only owns the store. He only owns the neighborhood. So that when the Black man explodes, the one that he wants to get at isnt there. So he destroys the property. Hes not a thief. Hes not trying to steal your cheap furniture or your cheap food. He wants to get at you, but youre not there. And instead of the sociologists analyzing it as it actually is, trying to understand it as it actually is, again they cover up the real issue, and they use the press to make it appear that these people are thieves, hoodlums. No! They are the victims of organized thievery, organized landlords who are nothing but thieves, merchants who are nothing but thieves, politicians who sit in the city hall and who are nothing but thieves in cahoots with the landlords and the merchants.

But again, the press is used to make the victim look like the criminal and make the criminal look like the victim.... This is imagery. And just as this imagery is practiced at the local level, you can understand it better by an international example. The best recent example at the international level to bear witness to what Im saying is what happened in the Congo. Look at what happened. We had a situation where a plane was dropping bombs on African villages. An African village has no defense against the bombs. And an African village is not sufficient threat that it has to be bombed! But planes were dropping bombs on African villages. When these bombs strike, they dont distinguish between enemy and friend. They dont distinguish between male and female. When these bombs are dropped on African villages in the Congo, they are dropped on Black women, Black children, Black babies. These human beings were blown to bits. I heard no outcry, no voice of compassion for these thousands of Black people who were slaughtered by planes.

Why was there no outcry? Why was there no concern? Because, again, the press very skillfully made the victims look like they were the criminals, and the criminals look like they were the victims.
They refer to the villages as rebel held, you know. As if to say, because they are rebel-held villages, you can destroy the population, and its okay. They also refer to the merchants of death as American-trained, anti-Castro Cuban pilots. This made it okay. Because these pilots, these mercenariesyou know what a mercenary is, hes not a patriot. A mercenary is not someone who goes to war out of patriotism for his country. A mercenary is a hired killer. A person who kills, who draws blood for money, anybodys blood. You kill a human being as easily as you kill a cat or a dog or a chicken. So these mercenaries, dropping bombs on African villages, caring nothing as to whether or not there are innocent, defenseless women and children and babies being destroyed by their bombs. But because theyre called mercenaries, given a glorified name, it doesnt excite you. Because they are referred to as American-trained pilots, because they are American-trained, that makes them okay. Anti-Castro Cubans, that makes them okay. Castros a monster, so anybody whos against Castro is all right with us, and anything they can do from there, thats all right with us.... They put your mind right in a bag and take it wherever they want, as well.

But its something that you have to look at and answer for. Because they are American planes, American bombs, escorted by American paratroopers, armed with machine guns. But, you know, they say theyre not soldiers, theyre just there as escorts, like they started out with some advisers in South Vietnam. Twenty thousand of them just advisers. These are just escorts. Theyre able to do all of this mass murder and get away with it by labeling it humanitarian, an act of humanitarianism. Or in the name of freedom, in the name of liberty. All kinds of high-sounding slogans, but its cold-blooded murder, mass murder. And its done so skillfully, so you and I, who call ourselves sophisticated in this twentieth century, are able to watch it, and put the stamp of approval upon it. Simply because its being done to people with black skin, by people with white skin.

They take a man who is a cold-blooded murderer, named Tshombe. Youve heard of him, Uncle Tom Tshombe. He murdered the prime minister, the rightful prime minister, Lumumba. He murdered him. Now heres a man whos an international murderer, selected by the State Department and placed over the Congo and propped into position by your tax dollars. Hes a killer. Hes hired by our government. Hes a hired killer. And to show the type of hired killer he is, as soon as hes in office, he hires more killers in South Africa to shoot down his own people. And you wonder why your American image abroad is so bankrupt. Notice I said, Your American image abroad is so bankrupt. They make this man acceptable by saying in the press that hes the only one that can unite the Congo. Ha. A murderer. They wont let China in the United Nations because they say she declared war on UN troops in Korea. Tshombe declared war on UN troops in Katanga. You give him money and prop him up. You dont use the same yardstick. You use the yardstick over here, change it over here.

This is true everybody can see you today. You make yourself look sick in the sight of the world trying to fool people that you were at least once wise with your trickery. But today your bag of tricks have absolutely run out. The whole world can see what youre doing. The press whips up hysteria in the white public. Then it shifts gears and starts working trying to get the sympathy of the white public. And then it shifts gears and gets the white public to support whatever criminal action theyre getting ready to involve the United States in.

Remember how they referred to the hostages as white hostages. Not hostages. They said these cannibals in the Congo had white hostages. Oh, and this got you all shook up. White nuns, white priests, white missionaries. Whats thp difference between a white hostage and a Black hostage? Whats the difference between a white life and a Black life? You must think theres a difference, because your press specifies whiteness. Nineteen white hostages cause you to grieve in your heart. During the months when bombs were being dropped on Black people by the hundreds and the thousands, you said nothing. And you did nothing. But as soon as a fewa handful of white people who didnt have any business getting caught up in that thing in the first placeas soon as their lives became involved, you got concerned.

I was in Africa during the summer when theywhen the mercenaries and the pilots were shooting down Black people in the Congo like flies. It wouldnt even get mentioned in the Western press. It wasnt mentioned. If it was mentioned, it was mentioned in the classified section of the newspaper. Someplace where youd need a microscope to find it. And at that time the African brothers, at first they werent taking hostages. They only began to take hostages when they found that these pilots were bombing their villages. And then they took hostages, moved them into the village, and warned the pilots that if you drop bombs on the village, youll hit your own people. It was a war maneuver. They were at war. They only held a hostage in a village to keep the mercenaries from murdering on a mass scale the people of those villages. They werent keeping them as hostages because they were cannibals. Or because they thought their flesh was tasty. Some of those missionaries had been over there for forty years and didnt get eaten up. If they were going to eat them they would have eaten them when they were young and tender. Why you cant even digest that old white meat on an old chicken.

Its imagery. They use their ability to create images, and then they use these images that theyve created to mislead the people. To confuse the people and make the people accept wrong as right and reject right as wrong. Make the people actually think that the criminal is the victim and the victim is the criminal. Even as I point this out, you may say, What does this all have to do with the Black man in America? And what does it have to do with the Black and white relations here in Rochester?

You have to understand it. Until I959 the image of the African continent was created by the enemies of Africa. Africa was a land dominated by outside powers. A land dominated by Europeans. And as these Europeans dominated the continent of Africa, it was they who created the image of Africa that was projected abroad. And they projected Africa and the people of Africa in a negative image, a hateful image. They made us think that Africa was a land of jungles, a land of animals, a land of cannibals and savages. It was a hateful image. And because they were so successful in projecting this negative image of Africa, those of us here in the West of African ancestry, the Afro-American, we looked upon Africa as a hateful place. We looked upon the African as a hateful person. And if you referred to us as an African it was like putting us as a servant, or playing house, or talking about us in the way we didnt want to be talked.

Why? Because those who oppress know that you cant make a person hate the root without making them hate the tree. You cant hate your own and not end up hating yourself. And since we all originated in Africa, you cant make us hate Africa without making us hate ourselves. And they did this very skillfully. And what was the result? They ended up with 22 million Black people here in America who hated everything about us that was African. We hated the African characteristics, the African characteristics. We hated our hair. We hated our nose, the shape of our nose, and the shape of our lips, the color of our skin. Yes we did. And it was you who taught us to hate ourselves simply by shrewdly maneuvering us into hating the land of our forefathers and the people on that continent.

As long as we hated those people, we hated ourselves. As long as we hated what we thought they looked like, we hated what we actually looked like. And you call me a hate teacher. Why, you taught us to hate ourselves. You taught the world to hate a whole race of people and have the audacity now to blame us for hating you simply because we dont like the rope that you put around our necks. When you teach a man to hate his lips, the lips that God gave him, the shape of the nose that God gave him, the texture of the hair that God gave him, the color of the skin that God gave him, youve committed the worst crime that a race of people can commit. And this is the crime that youve committed.

Our color became a chain, a psychological chain. Our bloodAfrican bloodbecame a psychological chain, a prison, because we were ashamed of it. We believe they would tell it to your face, and say they werent; they were! We felt trapped because our skin was black. We felt trapped because we had African blood in our veins. This is how you imprisoned us. Not just bringing us over here and making us slaves. But the image that you created of our motherland and the image that you created of our people on that continent was a trap, was a prison, was a chain, was the worst form of slavery that has ever been invented by a so-called civilized race and a civilized nation since the beginning of the world.

You still see the result of it among our people in this country today. Because we hated our African blood, we felt inadequate, we felt inferior, we felt helpless. And in our state of helplessness, we wouldnt work for ourselves. We turned to you for help, and then you wouldnt help us. We didnt feel adequate. We turned to you for advice and you gave us the wrong advice. Turned to you for direction and you kept us going in circles. But a change has come about. In us. And what from? Back in 55 in Indonesia, at Bandung, they had a conference of dark-skinned people. The people of Africa and Asia came together for the first time in centuries. They had no nuclear weapons, they had no air fleets, no navy. But they discussed their plight and they found that there was one thing that all of us had in commonoppression, exploitation, suffering. And we had a common oppressor, a common exploiter.

If a brother came from Kenya and called his oppressor an Englishman; and another came from the Congo, he called his oppressor a Belgian; another came from Guinea, he called his oppressor French. But when you brought the oppressors together theres one thing they all had in common, they were all from Europe. And this European was oppressing the people of Africa and Asia.

And since we could see that we had oppression in common and exploitation in common, sorrow and sadness and grief in common, our people began to get together and determined at the Bandung Conference that it was time for us to forget our differences. We had differences. Some were Buddhists, some were Hindus, some were Christians, some were Muslim, some didnt have any religion at all. Some were socialists, some were capitalists, some were communists, and some didnt have any economy at all. But with all of the differences that existed, they agreed on one thing, the spirit of Bandung was, from there on in, to de-emphasize the areas of difference and emphasize the areas that we had in common.

And it was the spirit of Bandung that fed the flames of nationalism and freedom not only in Asia, but especially on the African continent. From 55 to 60 the flames of nationalism, independence on the African continent, became so bright and so furious, they were able to burn and sting anything that got in its path. And that same spirit didnt stay on the African continent. It somehow or otherit slipped into the Western Hemisphere and got into the heart and the mind and the soul of the Black man in the Western Hemisphere who supposedly had been separate from the African continent for almost 400 years.

But the same desire for freedom that moved the Black man on the African continent began to burn in the heart and the mind and the soul of the Black man here, in South America, Central America, and North America, showing us we were not separated. Though there was an ocean between us, we were still moved by the same heartbeat. The spirit of nationalism on the African continentIt began to collapse; the powers, the colonial powers, they couldnt stay there. The British got in trouble in Kenya, Nigeria, Tanganyika, Zanzibar, and other areas of the continent. The French got in trouble in the entire French Equatorial North Africa, including Algeria. Became a trouble spot for France. The Congo wouldnt any longer permit the Belgians to stay there. The entire African continent became explosive from 5455 on up to 1959. By 1959 they couldnt stay there any longer. It wasnt that they wanted to go. It wasnt that all of a sudden they had become benevolent. It wasnt that all of a sudden they had ceased wanting to exploit the Black man of his natural resources. But it was the spirit of independence that was burning in the heart and mind of the Black man. He no longer would allow himself to be colonized, oppressed, and exploited. He was willing to lay down his life and take the lives of those who tried to take his, which was a new spirit.

The colonial powers didnt leave. But what did they do? Whenever a person is playing basketball, ifyou watch himthe players on the opposing team trap him and he doesnt want to get rid of, to throw the ball away, he has to pass it to someone whos in the clear, whos on the same team as he. And since Belgium and France and Britain and these other colonial powers were trappedthey were exposed as colonial powersthey had to find someone who was still in the clear, and the only one in the clear so far as the Africans were concerned was the United States. So they passed the ball to the United States. And this administration picked it up and ran like mad ever since. As soon as they grabbed the ball, they realized that they were confronted with a new problem. The problem was that the Africans had awakened. And in their awakening they were no longer afraid. And because the Africans were not afraid, it was impossible for the European powers to stay on that continent by force. So our State Department, grabbing the ball and in their new analysis, they realized that they had to use a new strategy if they were going to replace the colonial powers of Europe.

What was their strategy? The friendly approach. Instead of coming over there with their teeth gritted, they started smiling at the Africans. Were your friends. But in order to convince the African that he was their friend he had to start off pretending like they were our friend.

You didnt get the man to smile at you because you were bad, no. He was trying to impress your brother on the other side of the water. He smiled at you to make his smile consistent. He started using a friendly approach over there. A benevolent approach. A philanthropic approach. Call it benevolent colonialism. Philanthropic imperialism. Humanitarianism backed up by dollarism. Tokenism. This is the approach that they used. They didnt go over there well meaning. How could you leave here and go on the African continent with the Peace Corps and Cross Roads and these other outfits when youre hanging Black people in Mississippi? How could you do it? How could you train missionaries, supposedly over there to teach them about Christ, when you wont let a Black man in your Christs church right here in Rochester, much less in the South. You know thats something to think about. It gets me hot when I think about it.

From 1954 to 1964 can easily be looked upon as the era of the emerging African state. And as the African state emerged from 54 to 64, what impact, what effect did it have on the Afro-American, the Black American? As the Black man in Africa got independent, it put him in a position to be master of making his own image. Up until 1959 when you and I thought of an African, we thought of someone naked, coming with the tom-toms, with bones in his nose. Oh yeah! This was the only image you had in your mind of an African. And from 59 on when they begin to come into the UN and youd see them on the television youd get shocked. Here was an African who could speak better English than you. He made more sense than you. He had more freedom than you. Why places where you couldnt goplaces where you couldnt go, all he had to do was throw on his robes and walk right past you. It had to shake you up. And it was only when youd become shook up that you began to really wake up.

So as the African nations gained their independence and the image of the African continent began to change, the things agreed as the image of Africa switched from negative to positive. Subconsciously. The Black man throughout the Western Hemisphere, in his subconscious mind, began to identify with that emerging positive African image.

And when he saw the Black man on the African continent taking a stand, it made him become filled with the desire also to take a stand. The same image, the same just as the African image was negativeand you hear about old hat in the hand, compromising, fearful looks we were the same way. But when we began to read about Jomo Kenyatta and the Mau Mau and others, then you find Black people in this country began to think along the same line. And more closely along the same line than some of them really want to admit.

When they sawjust as they had to change their approach with the people on the African continent, they also then began to change their approach with our people on this continent. As they used tokenism and a whole lot of other friendly, benevolent, philanthropic approaches on the African continent, which were only token efforts, they began to do the same thing with us here in the States. Tokenism. They came up with all kinds of programs that werent really designed to solve anybodys problems. Every move they made was a token move. They never made a real down-to-earth move at one time to really solve the problem. They came up with a Supreme Court desegregation decision that they havent put into practice yet. Not even in Rochester, much less in Mississippi. They fooled the people in Mississippi by trying to make it appear that they were going to integrate the University of Mississippi. They took one Negro to the university backed up with about 6,00015,000 troops, I think it was. And I think it cost them $6 million.

And three or four people got killed in the act. And it was only an act. Now, mind you, after one of them got in, they said theres integration in Mississippi. They stuck two of them in the school in Georgia and said theres integration in Georgia. Why you should be ashamed. Really, if I was white, Id be so ashamed Id crawl under a rug. And Id feel so low while I was under that rug I wouldnt even leave a hump.

This tokenism, this tokenism was a program that was designed to protect the benefits of only a handful of handpicked Negroes. And these handpicked Negroes were given big positions, and then they were used to open up their mouths to tell the world, Look at how much progress were making. He should say, look at how much progress he is making. For while these handpicked Negroes were eating high on the hog, rubbing elbows with white folk, sitting in Washington, D.C., the masses of Black people in this country continued to live in the slum and in the ghetto. The masses, the masses of Black people in this country remain unemployed, and the masses of Black people in this country continue to go to the worst schools and get the worst education. Along during the same time appeared a movement known as the Black Muslim movement. The Black Muslim movement did this: Up until the time the Black Muslim movement came on the scene, the NAACP was regarded as radical. They wanted to investigate it. They wanted to investigate it. CORE and all the rest of them were under suspect, under suspicion. King wasnt heard of. When the Black Muslim movement came along talking that kind of talk that they talked, the white man said, Thank God for the NMCP. The Black Muslim movement has made the NMCP acceptable to white folks. It made its leaders acceptable. They then began to refer to them as responsible Negro leaders. Which meant they were responsible to white folk. Now I am not attacking the NMCP. Im just telling you about it. And what makes it so bad, you cant deny it.

So this is the contribution that that movement made. It frightened a lot of people. A lot of people who wouldnt act right out of love begin to act right out of fear. Because Roy [Wilkins] and [James] Farmer and some of the others used to tell white folk, look if you dont act right by us youre going to have to listen to them. They used us to better their own position, their own bargaining position. No matter what you think of the philosophy of the Black Muslim movement, when you analyze the part that it played in the struggle of Black people during the past twelve years you have to put it in its proper context and see it in its proper perspective. The movement itself attracted the most militant, the most dissatisfied, the most uncompromising elements of the Black community. And also the youngest elements of the Black community. And as this movement grew, it attracted such a militant, uncompromising, dissatisfied element.

The movement itself was supposedly based upon the religion of Islam and therefore supposedly a religious movement But because the world of Islam or the orthodox Muslim world would never accept the Black Muslim movement as a bona fide part of it, it put those of us who were in it in a sort of religious vacuum. It put us in a position of identifying ourselves by a religion, while the world in which that religion was practiced rejected us as not being bona fide practicerspractitioners of that religion. Also the government tried to maneuver us and label us as political rather than religious so that they could charge us with sedition and subversion. This is the only reason But although we were labeled political, because we were never permitted to take part in politics we were in a vacuum politically. We were in a religious vacuum. We were in a political vacuum. We were actually alienated, cut off from all type of activity with even the world that we were fighting against. We became a sort of a religious/political hybrid, all to ourselves. Not involved in anything but just standing on the sidelines condemning everything. But in no position to correct anything because we couldnt take action.

Yet at the same time, the nature of the movement was such that it attracted the activists. Those who wanted action. Those who wanted to do something about the evils that confronted all Black people. We werent particularly concerned with the religion of the Black man. Because whether he was a Methodist or a Baptist or an atheist or an agnostic, he caught the same hell.

So we could see that we had to have some action, and those of us who were activists became dissatisfied, disillusioned. And finally dissension set in and eventually a split. Those who split away were the real activists of the movement who were intelligent enough to want some kind of program that would enable us to fight for the rights of all Black people here in the Western Hemisphere.

But at the same time we wanted our religion. So when we left, the first thing we did we regrouped into a new organization known as the Muslim Mosque, headquartered in New York. And in that organization we adopted the real, orthodox religion of Islam, which is a religion of brotherhood. So that while accepting this religion and setting up an organization which could practice that religionand immediately this particular Muslim Mosque was recognized and endorsed by the religious officials of the Muslim world. We realized at the same time we had a problem in this society that went beyond religion. And it was for that reason we set up the Organization of Afro-American Unity in which anybody in the community could participate in an action program designed to bring about complete recognition and respect of Black people as human beings.

And the motto of the Organization of Afro-American I Unity is By Any Means Necessary. We dont believe in fighting a battle thats going toin which the ground rules are to be laid down by those who suppress us. We dont believe that we can win in a battle where the ground rules are laid down by those who exploit us. We dont believe that we can carry on a struggle trying to win the affection of those who for so long have oppressed and exploited us.

We believe that our fight is just. We believe that our grievances are just. We believe that the evil practices against Black people in this society are criminal and that those who engage in such criminal practices are to be looked upon themselves as nothing but criminals. And we believe that we are within our rights to fight those criminals by any means necessary. This doesnt mean that were for violence. But we dowe have seen that the federal government has shown its inability, its absolute unwillingness, to protect the lives and the property of Black people. We have seen where organized white racists, Klansmen, Citizens Councilmen, and others can come into the Black community and take a Black man and make him disappear and nothing be done about it.

We reanalyzed our condition. When we go back to 1939, Black people in America were shining shoes. Some of the most educated were shining in Michigan, where I came from, in Lansing, the capital. The best jobs you could get in the city were carrying trays out at the country club to feed white people. And usually the waiter at the country club was looked upon as the town big shot cause he had a good job around good white folks, you know.

He had the best education, but hed be shining shoes right at the State House, the capitol. Shining the governors shoes, and the attorney generals shoes, and this made him in the know, you know, cause he could shine white folks shoes who were in big places. Whenever the people downtown wanted to know what was going on in the Black community, he was their boy. He was whats known as the town Negro, the Negro leader. And those who werent shining shoes, the preachers, also had a big voice in the community. Thats all theyd let us do is shine shoes, wait on tables, and preach.

In 1939, before Hitler went on the rampage, or rather at the time yeah, before Hitler went on the rampage, a Black man couldnt even work in the factory. We were digging ditches on WPA. Some of you all have forgotten too quick. We were ditch-digging on the VVPA. Our food came from the welfare, they were stamped not to be sold. I got so many things from the store called not to be sold, I thought that was a store some place. This is the condition the Black man was in, and thats till 1939.... Until the war started, we were confined to these menial tasks. When the war started, they wouldnt even take us in the army. A Black man wasnt drafted. Was he or was he not? No! You couldnt join the navy. Remember that? Wouldnt draft one. This was as late as 1939 in the United States of America!

They taught you to sing sweet land of liberty and the rest of that stuff. No! You couldnt join the army. You couldnt join the navy. They wouldnt even draft you. They only took white folks. They didnt start drafting us until the Negro leader opened up his big mouth, talking about, If white folks must die, we must die too.

The Negro leader got a whole lot of Negroes killed in World War II who never had to die. So when America got into the war, immediately she was faced with a manpower shortage. Up until the time of the war, you couldnt get inside of a plant. I lived in Lansing, where Oldsmobiles factory was and Reos. There was about three in the whole plant and each one of them had a broom. They had education. They had gone to school. I think one had gone to college. But he was a broomologist. When times got tough and there was a manpower shortage, then they let us in the factory. Not through any effort of our own. Not through any sudden moral awakening on their part. They needed us. They needed manpower. Any kind of manpower. And when they got desperate and in need, they opened up the factory door and let us in. So we began to learn to run machines. Then we began to learn how to run machines, when they needed us. Put our women in as well as our men. As we learned to operate the machines, we began to make more money. As we began to make more money, we were able to live in a little better neighborhood. When we moved to a little better neighborhood, we went to a little better school. And when we went to that better school, we got a little better education and got in a little better position to get a little better job. It was no change of heart on their part. It was no sudden awakening of their moral consciousness. It was Hitler. It was Tojo. It was Stalin. Yes, it was pressure from the outside, at the world level, that enabled you and me to make a few steps forward. Why wouldnt they draft us and put us in the army in the first place? They had treated us so bad, they were afraid that if they put us in the army and give us a gun and showed us how to shoot it they feared that they wouldnt have to tell us what to shoot at.

And probably they wouldnt have had. It was their conscience. So I point this out to show that it was not change of heart on Uncle Sams part that permitted some of us to go a few steps forward. It was world pressure. It was threat from outside. Danger from outside that made itthat occupied his mind and forced him to permit you and me to stand up a little taller. Not because he wanted us to stand up. Not because he wanted us to go forward. He was forced to.

And once you properly analyze the ingredients that opened the doors even to the degree that they were forced open, when you see what it was, youll better understand your position today. And youll better understand the strategy that you need today. Any kind of movement for freedom of Black people based solely within the confines of America is absolutely doomed to fail.

As long as your problem is fought within the American context, all you can get as allies is fellow Americans. As long as you call it civil rights, its a domestic problem within the jurisdiction of the United States government. And the United States government consists of segregationists, racists. Why the most powerful men in the government are racists. This government is controlled by thirty-six committees, twenty congressional committees and sixteen senatorial committees. Thirteen of the twenty congressmen that make up the congressional committees are from the South. Ten of the sixteen senators that control the senatorial committees are from the South. Which means, that of the thirty-six committees that govern the foreign and domestic directions and temperament of the country in which we live, of the thirty-six, twenty-three of them are in the hands of racists. Outright, stone-cold, dead segregationists. This is what you and I are up against. We are in a society where the power is in the hands of those who are the worst breed of humanity. Now how are we going to get around them? How are we going to get justice in a Congress that they control? Or a Senate that they control? Or a White House that they control? Or from a Supreme Court that they control?

Look at the pitiful decision that the Supreme Court handed down. Brother, look at it! Dont you know these men on the Supreme Court are masters of legalnot only of law, but legal phraseology. They are such masters of the legal language that they could very easily have handed down a desegregation decision on education so worded that no one could have gotten around. But they come up with that thing worded in such a way that here ten years have passed, and theres all kind of loopholes in it. They knew what they were doing. They pretend to give you something while knowing all the time you cant utilize it.

They come up last year with a civil rights bill that they publicized all around the world as if it would lead us into the promised land of integration. Oh yeah! Just last week, the Right Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King come out of the jail house and went to Washington, D.C., saying hes going to ask every day for new legislation to protect voting rights for Black people in Alabama. Why? You just had legislation. You just had a civil rights bill. You mean to tell me that that highly publicized civil rights bill doesnt even give the federal government enough power to protect Black people in Alabama who dont want to do anything but register? Why its another foul trick, cause they tricked us year in and year out. Another foul trick.

So, since we see...I dont want you to think Im teaching hate. I love everybody who loves me. But I sure dont love those who dont love me. Since we see all of this subterfuge, this trickery, this maneuveringits not only at the federal level, the national level, the local level, all levels. The young generation of Blacks thats coming up now can see that as long as we wait for the Congress and the Senate and the Supreme Court and the president to solve our problems, youll have us waiting on tables for another thousand years. And there arent no days like those.

Since the civil rights billI used to see African diplomats at the UN crying out against the injustice that was being done to Black people in Mozambique, in Angola, the Congo, in South Africa, and I wondered why and how they could go back to their hotels and turn on the TV and see dogs biting Black people right down the block and policemen wrecking the stores of Black people with their clubs right down the block, and putting water hoses on Black people with pressure so high it tear our clothes off, right down the block. And I wondered how they could talk all that talk about what was happening in Angola and Mozambique and all the rest of it and see it happen right down the block and get up on the podium in the UN and not say anything about it.

But I went and discussed it with some of them. And they said that as long as the Black man in America calls his struggle a struggle of civil rightsthat in the civil rights context, its domestic and it remains within the jurisdiction of the United States. And if any of them open up their mouths to say anything about it, its considered a violation of the laws and rules of protocol. And the difference with the other people was that they didnt call their grievances civil rights grievances, they called them human rights grievances. Civil rights are within the jurisdiction of the government where they are involved. But human rights is part of the charter of the United Nations.

All the nations that signed the charter of the UN came up with the Declaration of Human Rights and anyone who classifies his grievances under the label of human rights violations, those grievances can then be brought into the United Nations and be discussed by people all over the world. For as long as you call it civil rights your only allies can be the people in the next community, many of whom are responsible for your grievance. But when you call it human rights it becomes international. And then you can take your troubles to the World Court. You can take them before the world. And anybody anywhere on this earth can become your ally.

So one of the first steps that we became involved in, those of us who got into the Organization of Afro American Unity, was to come up with a program that would make our grievances international and make the world see that our problem was no longer a Negro problem or an American problem but a human problem. A problem for humanity and a problem which should be attacked by all elements of humanity. A problem that was so complex that it was impossible for Uncle Sam to solve it himself and therefore we want to get into a body or conference with people who are in such positions that they can help us get some kind of adjustment for this situation before it gets so explosive that no one can handle it.

Thank you.
It is only being a Muslim which keeps me from seeing people by the color of their skin. This religion teaches brotherhood, but I have to be a realistI live in America, a society which does not believe in brotherhood in any sense of the term. Brute force is used by white racists to suppress nonwhites. It is a racist society ruled by segregationists.

Where the government fails to protect the Negro he is entitled to do it himself. He is within his rights. I have found the only white elements who do not want this advice given to undefensive Blacks are the racist liberals. They use the press to project us in the image of violence. There is an element of whites who are nothing but cold, animalistic racists. That element is the one that controls or has strong influence in the power structure. It uses the press skillfully to feed statistics to the public to make it appear that the rate of crime in the Black community, or community of nonwhite people, is at such a high level. It gives the impression or the image that everyone in that community is criminal. And as soon as the public accepts the fact that the dark-skinned community consists largely of criminals or people who are dirty, then it makes it possible for the power structure to set up a police-state system. Which will make it permissible in the minds of even the well-meaning white public for them to come in and use all kinds of police methods to brutally suppress the struggle on the part of these people against segregation, discrimination, and other acts that are unleashed against them that are absolutely unjust.

They use the press to set up this police state, and they use the press to make the white public accept whatever they do to the dark-skinned public. They do that here in London right now with the constant reference to the West Indian population and the Asian population having a high rate of crime or having a tendency toward dirtiness. They have all kinds of negative characteristics that they project to make the white public draw back, or to make the white public be apathetic when police-state-like methods are used in these areas to suppress the peoples honest and just struggle against discrimination and other forms of segregation.

A good example of how they do it in New York: last summer, when the Blacks were riotingthe riots, actually they werent riots in the first place; they were reactions against police brutality. And when the Afro-Americans reacted against the brutal measures that were executed against them by the police, the press all over the world projected them as rioters. When the store windows were broken in the Black community, immediately it was made to appear that this was being done not by people who were reacting over civil rights violations, but they gave the impression that these were hoodlums, vagrants, criminals, who wanted nothing other than to get into the stores and take the merchandise.

But this is wrong. In America the Black community in which we live is not owned by us. The landlord is white. The merchant is white. In fact, the entire economy of the Black community in the States is controlled by someone who doesnt even live there. The property that we live in is owned by someone else. The store that we trade with is operated by someone else. And these are the people who suck the economic blood of our community.

And being in a position to suck the economic blood of our community, they control the radio programs that cater to us, they control the newspapers, the advertising, that cater to us. They control our minds. They end up controlling our civic organizations. They end up controlling us economically, politically, socially, mentally, and every other kind of way. They suck our blood like vultures.

And when you see the Blacks react, since the people who do this arent there, they react against their property. The property is the only thing thats there. And they destroy it. And you get the impression over here that because they are destroying the property where they live, that they are destroying their own property. No. They cant get to the Man, so they get at what he owns.

This doesnt say its intelligent. But whoever heard of a sociological explosion that was done intelligently and politely? And this is what youre trying to make the Black man do. Youre trying to drive him into a ghetto and make him the victim of every kind of unjust condition imaginable. Then when he explodes, you want him to explode politely! You want him to explode according to somebodys ground rules. Why, youre dealing with the wrong man, and youre dealing with him at the wrong time in the wrong way.

Another example of how this imagery is mastered, at the international level, is the recent situation in the Congo. Here we have an example of planes dropping bombs on defenseless African villages. When a bomb is dropped on an African village, theres no way of defending the people from the bomb. The bomb doesnt make a distinction between men and women. That bomb is dropped on men, women, children, and babies. Now it has not been in any way a disguised fact that planes have been dropping bombs on Congolese villages all during the entire summer. There is no outcry. There is no concern. There is no sympathy. There is no urge on the part of even the so-called progressive element to try and bring a halt to this mass murder. Why?

Because all the press had to do was use that shrewd propaganda word that these villages were in rebel-held territory. Rebel-held, what does that mean? Thats an enemy, so anything that they do to those people is all right. You cease to think of the women and the children and the babies in the so-called rebel-held territory as human beings. So that anything that is done to them is done with justification. And the progressives, the liberals dont even make any outcry. They sit twiddling their thumbs, as if they were captivated by this press imagery that has been mastered here in the West also.

They refer to the pilots that are dropping the bombs on these babies as American-trained, anti-Castro Cuban pilots. As long as they are American-trained, this is supposed to put the stamp of approval on it, because America is your ally. As long as they are anti-Castro Cubans, since Castro is supposed to be a monster and these pilots are against Castro, anybody else they are against is also all right. So the American planes with American bombs being piloted by American-trained pilots, dropping American bombs on Black people, Black babies, Black children, destroying them completelywhich is nothing but mass murdergoes absolutely unnoticed.

They take this man TshombeI guess hes a manand try and make him acceptable to the public by using the press to refer to him as the only one who can unite the Congo. Imagine, a murderernot an ordinary murderer, a murderer of a prime minister, the murderer of the rightful prime minister of the Congoand yet they want to force him upon the people of the Congo, through Western manipulation and Western pressures. The United States, the country that I come from, pays his salary. They openly admit that they pay his salary. And in saying this, I dont want you to think that I come here to make an anti-American speech. I wouldnt come here for that. I come here to make a speech, to tell you the truth. And if the truth is anti-American, then blame the truth, dont blame me.

Hes propped up by American dollars. The salaries of the hired killers from South Africa that he uses to kill innocent Congolese are paid by American dollars. Which means that I come from a country that is busily sending the Peace Corps to Nigeria while sending hired killers to the Congo. The government is not consistent; something is not right there. And it starts some of my African brothers and sisters that have been so happy to see the Peace Corps landing on their shores to take another look at that thing, and see what it really is. [From the audience: What is it?] Exactly what it says: Peace Corps, get a piece of their country.

So what the press does with its skillful ability to create this imagery, it uses its pages to whip up this hysteria in the white public. And as soon as the hysteria of the white public reaches the proper degree, they will begin to work on the sympathy of the white public. And once the sympathy reaches the proper degree, then they put forth their program, knowing that they are going to get the support of the gullible white public in whatever they do. And what they are going to do is criminal. And what they are doing is criminal.

How do they do it? If you recall reading in the paper, they never talked about the Congolese who were being slaughtered. But as soon as a few whites, the lives of a few whites were at stake, they began to speak of white hostages, white missionaries, white priests, white nunsas if a white life, one white life, was of such greater value than a Black life, than a thousand Black lives.

They showed you their open contempt for the lives of the Blacks, and their deep concern for the lives of the whites. This is the press. And after the press had gotten the whites all whipped up, then anything that the Western powers wanted to do against these defenseless, innocent freedom fighters from the eastern provinces of the Congo, the white public went along with it. So to get towards the end of that, what it has done, just in press manipulation, the Western governments have permitted themselves to get trapped, in a sense, in backing Tshombe, the same as the United States is trapped over there in South Vietnam. If she goes forward she loses, if she backs up she loses. Shes getting bogged down in the Congo in the same way. 
Because no African troops win victories for Tshombe. They never have. The only war, the only battles won by the African troops, in the African revolution, in the Congo area, were those won by the freedom fighters from the Oriental province.

They won battles with spears, stones, twigs. They won battles because their heart was in what they were doing. But Tshombes men from the central Congo government never won any battles. And it was for this reason that he had to import these white mercenaries, the paid killers, to win some battles for him. Which means that Tshombes government can only stay in power with white help, with white troops.

Well, there will come a time when he wont be able to recruit any more mercenaries, and the Western powers, who are really behind him, will then have to commit their own troops openly. Which means you will then be bogged down in the Congo the same as youre bogged down over there now in South Vietnam. And you cant win in the Congo. If you cant win in South Vietnam, you know you cant win in the Congo.

You think you can win in South Vietnam? The French were deeply entrenched. The French were deeply entrenched in Vietnam for a hundred years or so. They had the best weapons of warfare, a highly mechanized army, everything that you would need. And the guerrillas come out of the rice paddies with nothing but sneakers on and a rifle and a bowl of rice, nothing but gym shoestennis shoesand a rifle and a bowl of rice. And you know what they did in Dien Bien Phu. They ran the French out of there. And if the French were deeply entrenched and couldnt stay there, then how do you think someone else is going to stay there, who is not even there yet. Yes, all of them are brothers. They had a bowl of rice and a rifle and some shoes. I dont care whether they came from China or South Vietnam. And the French arent there anymore. We dont care how they did it; theyre not there anymore. The same thing will happen in the Congo.

See, the African revolution must proceed onward, and one of the reasons that the Western powers are fighting so hard and are trying to cloud the issue in the Congo is that its not a humanitarian project. Its not a feeling or sense of humanity that makes them want to go in and save some hostages, but there are bigger stakes.

They realize not only that the Congo is a source of mineral wealth, minerals that they need, but the Congo is so situated strategically, geographically, that if it falls into the hands of a genuine African government that has the hopes and aspirations of the African people at heart, then it will be possible for the Africans to put their own soldiers right on the border of Angola and wipe the Portuguese out of there overnight.

So that if the Congo falls, Mozambique and Angola must fall. And when they fall, suddenly you have to deal with Ian Smith. He wont be there overnight once you can put some troops on his borders. Oh yes. Which means it will only be a matter of time before they will be right on the border with South Africa, and then they can talk the type of language that the South Africans understand. And this is the only language that they understand.

I might point out right here and nowand I say it bluntlythat you have had a generation of Africans who actually have believed that they could negotiate, negotiate, negotiate, and eventually get some kind of independence. But youre getting a new generation that is being born right now, and they are beginning to think with their own mind and see that you cant negotiate upon freedom nowadays. If something is yours by right, then you fight for it or shut up. If you cant fight for it, then forget it.

So we in the West have a stake in the African revolution. We have a stake for this reason: as long as the African continent was dominated by enemies, and as long as it was dominated by colonial powers, those colonial powers were enemies of the African people. They were enemies to the African continent. They meant the African people no good, they did the African people no good, they did the African continent no good.

And then in the position that they were, they were the ones who created the image of the African continent and the African people. They created that continent and those people in a negative image. And they projected this negative image abroad. They projected an image of Africa in the people abroad that was very hateful, extremely hateful. And because it was hateful, there are over a hundred million of us of African heritage in the West who looked at that hateful image and didnt want to be identified with it. We shunned it, and not because it was something to be shunned. But we believed the image that had been created of our own homeland by the enemy of our own homeland. And in hating that image we ended up hating ourselves without even realizing it.

Why? Because once we in the West were made to hate Africa and hate the African, why, the chain-reaction effect was it had to make us end up hating ourselves. You cant hate the roots of the tree without hating the tree, without ending up hating the tree. You cant hate your origin without ending up hating yourself. You cant hate the land, your motherland, the place that you came from, and we cant hate Africa without ending up hating ourselves.

The Black man in the Western Hemispherein North America, Central America, South America, and in the Caribbeanis the best example of how one can be made, skillfully, to hate himself that you can find anywhere on this earth.

The reason youre having a problem with the West Indians right now is because they hate their origin. Because they dont want to accept their origin, they have no origin, they have no identity. They are running around here in search of an identity, and instead of trying to be what they are, they want to be Englishmen. Which is not their fault, actually. Because in America our people are trying to be Americans, and in the islands you got them trying to be Englishmen, and nothing sounds more obnoxious than to find somebody from Jamaica running around here trying to outdo the Englishman with his Englishness.

And I say that this is a very serious problem, because all of it stems from what the Western powers do to the image of the African continent and the African people. By making our people in the Western Hemisphere hate Africa, we ended up hating ourselves. We hated our African characteristics. We hated our African identity. We hated our African features. So much so that you would find those of us in the West who would hate the shape of our nose. We would hate the shape of our lips. We would hate the color of our skin and the texture of our hair. This was a reaction, but we didnt realize that it was a reaction.

Imagine now, somebody got nerve enough, some whites have the audacity to refer to me as a hate teacher. If Im teaching someone to hate, I teach them to hate the Ku Klux Klan. But here in America, they have taught us to hate ourselves. To hate our skin, hate our hair, hate our features, hate our blood, hate what we are. Why, Uncle Sam is a master hate teacher, so much so that he makes somebody think hes teaching love, when hes teaching hate. When you make a man hate himself, why you really got it and gone.

By skillfully making us hate Africa and, in turn, making us hate ourselves, hate our color and our blood, our color became a chain. Our color became to us a chain. It became a prison. It became something that was a shame, something that we felt held us back, kept us trapped.

So because we felt that our color had trapped us, had imprisoned us, had brought us down, we ended up hating the Black skin, which we felt was holding us back. We ended up hating the Black blood, which we felt was holding us back. This is the problem that the Black man in the West has had.
The African hasnt realized that this was the problem. And it was only as long as the African himself was held in bondage by the colonial powers, was kept from projecting any positive image of himself on our continent, something that we could look at proudly and then identify withit was only as long as the African himself was kept down that we were kept down.

But to the same degree, during these recent years, that the African people have become independent, and they have gotten in a position on that continent to project their own image, their image has shifted from negative to positive. And to the same degree that it has shifted from negative to positive, youll find that the image of the Black man in the West of himself has also shifted from negative to positive. To the same degree that the African has become uncompromising and militant in knowing what he wants, you will find that the Black man in the West has followed the same line.

Why? Because the same beat, the same heart, the same pulse that moves the Black man on the African continentdespite the fact that four hundred years have separated us from that mother continent, and an ocean of water has separated us from that mother continent still, the same pulse that beats in the Black man on the African continent today is beating in the heart of the Black man in North America, Central America, South America, and in the Caribbean. Many of them dont know it, but its true.

As long as we hated our African blood, our African skin, our Africanness, we ended up feeling inferior, we felt inadequate, and we felt helpless. And because we felt so inferior and so inadequate and so helpless, instead of trying to stand on our own feet and do something for ourselves, we turned to the white man, thinking he was the only one who could do it for us. Because we were taught, we have been taught, that he was the personification of beauty and the personification of success.

At the Bandung Conference in 1955, one of the first and best steps toward real independence for non-white people took place. The people of Africa and Asia and Latin America were able to get together. They sat down, they realized that they had differences. They agreed not to place any emphasis any longer upon these differences, but to submerge the areas of differences and place emphasis upon areas where they had something in common.

This agreement that was reached at Bandung produced the spirit of Bandung. So that the people who were oppressed, who had no jet planes, no nuclear weapons, no armies, no naviesand despite the fact that they didnt have this, their unity alone was sufficient to enable them, over a period of years, to maneuver and make it possible for other nations in Asia to become independent, and many more nations in Africa to become independent.

And by 1959, many of you will recall how colonialism on the African continent had already begun to collapse. It began to collapse because the spirit of African nationalism had been fanned from a spark to a roaring flame. And it made it impossible for the colonial powers to stay there by force. Formerly, when the Africans were fearful, the colonial powers could come up with a battleship, or threaten to land an army, or something like that, and the oppressed people would submit and go ahead being colonized for a while longer.

But by 1959 all of the fear had left the African continent and the Asian continent. And because this fear was gone, especially in regards to the colonial powers of Europe, it made it impossible for them to continue to stay in there by the same methods that they had employed up to that time.

So its just like when a person is playing football. If he has the ball and he gets trapped, he doesnt throw the ball away, he passes it to some of his teammates who are in the clear. And in 1959, when France and Britain and Belgium and some of the others saw that they were trapped by the African nationalism on that continent, instead of throwing the ball of colonialism away, they passed it to the only one of their team that was in the clearand that was Uncle Sam. Uncle Sam grabbed the ball and has been running with it ever since.

The one who picked it up, really, was John F. Kennedy. He was the shrewdest backfield runner that America has produced in a long timeoh yes he was. He was very tricky; he was intelligent; he was an intellectual; he surrounded himself with intellectuals who had a lot of foresight and a lot of cunning. The first thing they did was to give a reanalysis of the problem. They realized they were confronted with a new problem.

The newness of the problem was created by the fact that the Africans had lost all fear. There was no fear in them anymore. Therefore the colonial powers couldnt stay there by force, and America, the new colonial power, neocolonial power, or neo-imperialist power, also couldnt stay there by force. So they come up with a friendly approach, a new approach which was friendly. Benevolent colonialism or philanthropic imperialism. They called it humanitarianism, or dollarism. And whereas the Africans could fight against colonialism, they found it difficult to fight against dollarism, or to condemn dollarism. It was all a token friendship, and all of the so-called benefits that were offered to the African countries were nothing but tokens.

But from 54 to 64 was the era of an emerging Africa, an independent Africa. And the impact of those independent African nations upon the civil rights struggle in the United States was tremendous. Number one, one of the first things the African revolution produced was rapid growth in a movement called the Black Muslim movement. The militancy that existed on the African continent was one of the main motivating factors in the rapid growth of the group known as the Black Muslim movement, to which I belonged. And the Black Muslim movement was one of the main ingredients in the entire civil rights struggle.

Martin Luther King has held Negroes in check up to recently. But hes losing his grip, hes losing his influence, hes losing his control.

I know you dont want me to say that. But, see, this is why youre in trouble. You want somebody to come and tell you that your house is safe, while youre sitting on a powder keg. This is the mentality, this is the level of Western mentality today. Rather than face up to the facts concerning the danger that youre in, you would rather have someone come along and jive you and tell you that everything is all right and pack you to sleep. Why, the best thing that anybody can tell you is when they let you know how fed up with disillusionment and frustration the man in your house has become.

So to bring my talk to a conclusion, I must point out that just as John F. Kennedy realized the necessity of a new approach on the African problemand I must say that it was during his administration that the United States gained so much influence on the African continent. They removed the other colonial powers and stepped in themselves with their benevolent, philanthropic, friendly approach. And they got just as firm a grip on countries on that continent as some of the colonial powers formerly had on that continent. Not only on the African continent but in Asia too. They did it with dollars.

They used a new approach on us in the States, also. Friendly. Whereas formerly they just outright denied us certain rights, they began to use a new, tricky approach. And this approach was to make it appear that they were making moves to solve our problems. They would pass bills, they would come up with Supreme Court decisions. The Supreme Court came up with what they called a desegregation decision in 1954it hasnt been implemented yet; they cant even implement it in New York City, where I liveoutlawing the segregated school system, supposedly to eliminate segregated schooling in Mississippi and Alabama and other places in the South. And they havent even been able to implement this Supreme Court decision concerning the educational system in New York City and in Boston and some of the so-called liberal cities of the North.

This was all tokenism. They made the world think that they had desegregated the University of Mississippi. This shows you how deceitful they are. They took one Negro, named Meredith, and took all of the world press down to show that they were going to solve the problem by putting Meredith in the University of Mississippi. I think it cost them something like $15 million and they had to use about seven thousand troopsone or the otherto put one Black man in the University of Mississippi.

And then Look magazine came out with a story afterwards showing the expos where the attorney generalat that time Robert Kennedyhad made a deal with Governor Barnett. They were going to play a game on the Negro. Barnett was the racist governor from Mississippi. Kennedy was one of these shining liberal progressivesRobert, that is. And they had made a deal, according to Look magazinewhich all belongs to the same setup, so they must know what they are talking about. Look magazine said that Robert Kennedy had told Barnett, Now, since you want the white votes in the South, what you do is you stand in the doorway and pretend like youre going to keep Meredith out. And when I come, Im going to come with the marshals, and force Meredith in. So youll keep all the white votes in the South, and Ill get all the Negro votes in the North.

This is what we face in that country. And Kennedy is supposed to be a liberal. Hes supposed to be a friend of the Negro. Hes supposed to be the brother of John F. Kennedyall of them in the same family. You know, he being the attorney general, he couldnt go down with that kind of deal unless he had the permission of his older brother, who was his older brother at that time.

So they come up only with tokenism. And this tokenism that they give us benefits only a few. A few handpicked Negroes gain from this; a few handpicked Negroes get good jobs; a few handpicked Negroes get good homes or go to a decent school. And then they use these handpicked Negroes, they put em on television, blow em up, and make it look like you got a whole lot of em, when you only got one or two.

And this one or two is going to open up his mouth and talk about how the problem is being solved. And the whole world thinks that Americas race problem is being solved, when actually the masses of Black people in America are still living in the ghettos and the slums; they still are the victims of inferior housing; they are still the victims of a segregated school system, which gives them inferior education. They are still victims, after they get that inferior education, where they can only get the worst form of jobs.

And they do this very skillfully to keep us trapped. They know that as long as they keep us undereducated, or with an inferior education, its impossible for us to compete with them for job openings. And as long as we cant compete with them and get a decent job, were trapped. We are low-wage earners. We have to live in a run-down neighborhood, which means our children go to inferior schools. They get inferior education. And when they grow up, they fall right into the same cycle again.

This is the American way. This is the American democracy that she tries to sell to the whole world as being that which will solve the problems of other people too. Its the worst form of hypocrisy that has ever been practiced by any government or society anywhere on this earth, since the beginning of time.

It is the African revolution that produced the Black Muslim movement. It was the Black Muslim movement that pushed the civil rights movement. And it was the civil rights movement that pushed the liberals out into the open, where today they are exposed as people who have no more concern for the rights of dark-skinned humanity than they do for any other form of humanity.

To bring my talk to a conclusion, all of this created a hot climate, a hot climate. And from 1963, 64 it reached its peak. Nineteen sixty-three was started out in America by all of the politicians talking about this being the hundredth year since the Emancipation Proclamation. They were going to celebrate all over America a century of progress in race relations. This is the way January and February and March of 1963 started out.

And then Martin Luther King went into Birmingham, Alabama, just trying to get a few Negroes to be able to sit down at a lunch counter and drink an integrated cup of coffee. Thats all he wanted. Thats all he wanted. They ended up putting him in jail. They ended up putting thousands of Negroes in jail. And many of you saw on television, in Birmingham, how the police had these big vicious dogs biting Black people. They were crushing the skulls of Black people. They had water hoses turned on our women, stripping off the clothes from our own women, from our children.

And the world saw this. The world saw what the world had thought was going to be a year which would celebrate a hundred years of progress toward good race relations between white and Black in the United States they saw one of the most inhuman, savage displays there in that country.
Right after that, this was followed by the assassination of John F. Kennedy, all by the same problem, and Medgar Evers, another one by the same problem. And it ended in the bombing of a church in Alabama where four little girls, Christians, sitting in Sunday school, singing about Jesus, were blown apart by people who claim to be Christians.  And this happened in the year 1963, the year that they said in that country would mark a hundred years of good relations between the races.

By 1964...1964 was the year in which three civil rights workers, who were doing nothing other than trying to show Black people in Mississippi how to register and take advantage of their political potentialthey were murdered in cold blood. They werent murdered by some unknown element. They were murdered by an organized group of criminals known as the Ku Klux Klan, which was headed by the sheriff and his deputy and a clergyman. A preacher, a man of the cloth, was responsible for the murder. And when they tell you what was done to the body of that little Black one that they foundall three were murdered, but when they found the three bodies they said that every bone in the body of the Black one was broken, as if these brutes had gone insane while they were beating him to death. This was in 1964.

Now 1965 is here, and you got these same old people, jumping up talking about the Great Society now is coming into existence. Nineteen sixty-five will be the longest and the hottest and the bloodiest year that has yet been witnessed in the United States. Why? Im not saying this to advocate violence. Im saying this after a careful analysis of the ingredientsthe sociological, political dynamite that exists in every Black community in that country.

Africa is emerging. Its making the Black man in the Western Hemisphere militant. Its making him shift from negative to positive in his image of himself and in his confidence in himself. He sees himself as a new man. Hes beginning to identify himself with new forces. Whereas in the past he thought of his problem as one of civil rightswhich made it a domestic issue, which kept it confined to the jurisdiction of the United States, a jurisdiction in which he could only seek the aid of white liberals within continental United Statestoday the Black man in the Western Hemisphere, especially in the United States, is beginning to see where his problem is not one of civil rights, but it is rather one of human rights. And that in the human rights context it becomes an international issue. It ceases to be a Negro problem, it ceases to be an American problem. It becomes a human problem, a problem of human rights, a problem of humanity, a problem for the world.

And by shifting his entire position from civil rights to human rights, he puts it on the world stage and makes it possible where today he no more has to rely on only the white liberals within continental United States to be his supporters. But he brings it onto the world stage and makes it possible for all of our African brothers, our Asian brothers, our Latin American brothers, and those people in Europe, some of whom claim to mean right, also to step into the picture and do whatever is necessary to help us to see that our rights are guaranteed usnot sometime in the long future, but almost immediately.

So the basic difference between the struggle of the Black man in the Western Hemisphere today from the past: he has a new sense of identity; he has a new sense of dignity; he has a new sense of urgency.

And above all else, he sees now that he has allies. He sees that the brothers on the African continent, who have emerged and gotten independent states, can see that they have an obligation to the lost brother who went astray and then found himself today in a foreign land. They are obligated. They are just as obligated to the brother whos gone away as they are to the brother whos still at home.

And just as you see the oppressed people all over the world today getting together, the Black people in the West are also seeing that they are oppressed. Instead of just calling themselves an oppressed minority in the States, they are part of the oppressed masses of people all over the world today who are crying out for action against the common oppressor.

Thank you.SPEECH 1


...Thank you so much.  That's so nice.  Isn't he a great guy.  He doesn't get a fair press; he doesn't get it.  It's just not fair.  And I have to tell you I'm here, and very strongly here, because I have great respect for Steve King and have great respect likewise for Citizens United, David and everybody, and tremendous resect for the Tea Party.  Also, also the people of Iowa.  They have something in common.  Hard-working people.  They want to work, they want to make the country great.  I love the people of Iowa.  So that's the way it is.  Very simple.
With that said, our country is really headed in the wrong direction with a president who is doing an absolutely terrible job.  The world is collapsing around us, and many of the problems we've caused.  Our president is either grossly incompetent, a word that more and more people are using, and I think I was the first to use it, or he has a completely different agenda than you want to know about, which could be possible.  In any event, Washington is broken, and our country is in serious trouble and total disarray.  Very simple.  Politicians are all talk, no action.  They are all talk and no action.  And it's constant; it never ends.
And I'm a conservative, actually very conservative, and I'm a Republican.  And I'm very disappointed by our Republican politicians.  Because they let the president get away with absolute murder.  You see always, oh we're going to do this, we're going to--.  Nothing ever happens; nothing ever happens.
You look at Obamacare.  A total catastrophe and by the way it really kicks in in '16 and it is going to be a disaster.  People are closing up shops.  Doctors are quitting the business.  I have a friend of mine who's a doctor, a very good doctor, a very successful guy.  He said, I have more accountants than I have patients.  And he needs because it is so complicated and so terrible and he's never had that before and he's going to close up his business.  And he was very successful guy.  But it's happening more and more.
Look at Obamacare with a $5 billion website.  I have many websites, many, many websites.  They're all over the place.  But for $10, okay?
Now everything about Obamacare was a lie.  It was a filthy lie.  And when you think about it, lies, I mean are they prosecuted?  Does anyone do anything?  And what are the Republican politicians doing about it?  He lied about the doctor, he lied about every aspect.  You can keep your plan.  And you've all heard that hundreds of times.  That's like the real estate location, location.  I don't even say it anymore because everybody goes location, location.  But you have heard this about Obamacare.
And it's disgraceful.  It's a big, fat, horrible lie.  Your deductibles are going through the roof.  You're not going to get--unless you're hit by an army tank, you're not going to get coverage.  And people that had plans that they loved, that they really loved, don't have those plans anymore.  So it's a real, real disaster.  And somebody has to repeal and replace Obamacare.  And they have to do it fast and not just talk about it.
Now, we have to build a fence.  And it's got to be a beauty.  Who can build better than Trump?  I build; it's what I do.  I build; I build nice fences, but I build great buildings.  Fences are easy, believe me.  I saw the other day on television people just walking across the border.  They're walking.  The military is standing there holding guns and people are just walking right in front, coming into our country.  It is so terrible.  It is so unfair.  It is so incompetent.  And we don't have the best coming in.  We have people that are criminals, we have people that are crooks.  You can certainly have terrorists.  You can certainly have Islamic terrorists.  You can have anything coming across the border.  We don't do anything about it.  So I would say that if I run and if I win, I would certainly start by building a very, very powerful border.


Again, the politicians talk about it and they do nothing about it.  Benghazi.  Oh, Benghazi, Benghazi.  Everything is Benghazi.  What happens?  Nothing.
IRS, e-mails.  I get sued all the time, okay.  I run a big business.  You know I've always said it's very, very hard for a person who is very successful.  I have done so many deals.  Almost all of them have been tremendously successful.  You'll see that when I file my statements.  I mean you will see; you will be very proud of me, okay.  But I've always said, and I said it strongly, it's very hard for somebody that does tremendous numbers of deals to run for politics, run for political office, any office, let alone president.  Because you've done so much; you've beaten so many people; you've created so many--  Look, Obama, what did he do?  No deal.  He never did a deal.  He did one deal.  A house.  And if you did that house you'd be in jail right now, okay.  He got away with murder.  But I can tell you, e-mails.  IRS, the e-mails, thousands of them, they were lost; they were lost.  If you were in my world you would know that e-mails can't be lost; they can't be lost.  So why aren't our politicians finding out where those e-mails are?
They talk about executive orders and they talk about immigration and they talk about oh well we have to stop the border; that's the end of it.  Believe me if I did something you would have a border that would be great.  But they talk about it.  And then you have a president that does an executive order.  Nobody even heard of an executive order.  He does it to let people come in and nobody does anything about executive orders.  Why didn't they go to court and ask for declaratory judgment--which is something that when you know somebody is going to go after you and when it's in writing, and he's been saying it for a long time; he said, I'm going to approve this and that--why didn't our Republicans go in and get a declaratory judgment from the courts because you could have started the process six months earlier.  Instead they have a weak lawsuit, that probably the time it's finished, I know so much about this, six, seven, eight years from now everyone's going to forget about it.  We'll be into a different mode, and our country will be further destroyed.  So we have to do something.
Jobs.  China.  I mean I've made so much money fighting against the Chinese.  One of the best deals I ever did was against the Chinese, and they respect me for it.  And I know them.  And they say, we can't believe what we're getting away with.  We can't believe how stupid your leaders are.  They tell me that.  Now they don't know I'm going to go and make a speech about it, but why not.  But they tell me that.
And by the way, especially for the folks here that sell so much--goods, I mean the goods you sell are incredible; I don't know if you've been watching what's happening with the devaluations of so many countries.  The Euro, China is going crazy with the devaluation.  I never thought that they'd have the guts to do what they're doing.  They are devaluing down to nothing.  And what it's going to do is make it impossible for you to sell your product; it's going make it impossible for you to compete.  And they're getting away with it.  And they wouldn't have even done it two years ago, but now they feel we're so weak and we have so many different problems all over the world that they can do it.  But you watch this devaluation of all of it.  I mean the Euro, China, Mexico; everybody is devaluing.  And when you hear the dollar is getting stronger, it sounds good.  You know it's one of those things, sounds good.  Be very careful.  Be very careful.  Because we're just going to lose more and more business to these foreign countries that really know what they are doing.  They have it set.  Don't forget another thing.  China became the number one economic power a year ago.  That was unthinkable; to think that that was going to happen.  It was absolutely unthinkable.  So it happened and it's very, very sad.
Now we spent $2 trillion in Iraq.  We got nothing.  They don't even respect us; they don't even care about us.  Until they started getting their ass kicked, and call, oh please come back and help us.  We want you out; then all of the sudden a new group forms, ISIS.  By the way, you know how they formed.  They took the oil.  And for those of you that know and love Donald Trump--there are some of you--have I been saying for four years, keep the oil.  So now ISIS has the oil.  And the stuff that ISIS doesn't have, Iran is going to take.  So we get nothing.  We have $2 trillion and we have thousands of lives lost, thousands, and we have, what do we have.  I mean I walk down the streets of New York and I see so many wounded warriors, incredible people.  And we have to help those people, we have to help our vets, we have to help our military, we have to build our military.  But, and we have to do it fast; we have to do it fast.  We have incompetent people.  They put people in charge that have no clue what they're doing.  It needs money.
We have to make our country rich again so we do that, so we can save Social Security.  'Cause I'm not a cutter; I'll probably be the only Republican that does not want to cut Social Security.  I'm not a cutter of Social Security; I want to make the country rich so that Social Security can be afforded, and Medicare and Medicaid.  Get rid of the waste, get rid of the fraud, but you deserve your Social Security; you've been paying your Security.  And like, I like Congressman Ryan, I like a lot of the people that are talking about you know cutting Social Security, and by the way the Democrats are eating your lunch on this issue.  It's an issue that you're not going to win; you've got to make the country rich again and strong again so that you can afford it, and so you can afford military, and all of the other things.
Now, we have a game changer now, and the game changer is nuclear weapons.  We really do have to get strong, and we have to get strong fast.  We can't let Iran get a nuclear weapon.  We can't do it.  Can't do it.  We cannot let that happen.  You know in the old days, I would have said 100 years ago, 50 years ago, 30 years ago, pull out and let them fight each other.
Here we are in Syria.  We're fighting people that want to overturn Syria.  Think of this.  We're fighting ISIS, but ISIS wants to overturn the government.  Maybe you let them fight for a little while and then you take out the one that remains, okay.  But think of it; think of it.  ISIS is fighting them and we are bombing the hell out of them, but we want Syria to fall.  There are so many things; there are so many things.
But the one game changer that we have to be careful with, that we never really had to think about  too much before, other than a cetain number of years ago, is the nuclear.  Nuclear today, it's not like soldiers in uniforms shooting rifles.  You can take out the East Coast of this country, you can take out large sections of the Midwest, you can take out things that were unthinkable.  The power.  And we have to be in a position where that never, ever, ever, every happens.  We've never had this before.
We have a situation in Afghanistan; we're spending tremendous amounts of money there.  We're trying to do the right thing.  We have leadership, again--no leadership respects us.  You know, leadership of other places never respect stupid people, okay, that's one thing you're going to find.  The same thing is happening there.  And I never knew that Afghanistan until a year ago or so, Afghanistan has tremendous wealth in minerals, different, not the oil, but minerals.  And we're fighting here, and on the other side of the mountain China is taking out all the minerals.  They're taking it out.  Trillion of dollars and millions of dollars of minerals.  So we're fighting here and they are taking it out, looking at us and saying thank you very much sucker.  It's really, really crazy.


So we have to rebuild quickly our infrastructure of this country.  If we don't--  The other day in Ohio a bridge collapsed.  Bridges are collapsing all over the country.  The reports on bridges and the like are unbelievable, what's happening with our infrastructure.
I go to Saudi Arabia, I go to Dubai; I am doing big jobs in Dubai.  I go to various different places.  I go to China.  They are building a bridge on every corner.  They have bridges that make the George Washington Bridge like small time stuff.  They're building the most incredible things you have ever seen.  They are building airports in Qatar--which they like to say "cutter" but I've always said "qatar" so I'll keep it "qatar" what the hell.  But they're building, they're building an airport and have just completed an airport the likes of which you have never seen, in Dubai an airport the likes of which you have never seen.  And then I come back to LaGuardia where the runways have potholes.  The place is falling apart.  You go into the main terminal and they have a terraza floor that's so old it's falling apart.  And they have a hole in it, and they replace it with asphalt.  So you have a white terraza floor and they put asphalt all over the place.  This is inside, not outside.  And I just left Dubai where they have the most incredible thing you've ever seen.  In fact my pilot said oh Mr. Trump this is such an honor.  I said it's not an honor; they're just smart.  But you look at LAX, and you look at Kennedy Airport, and you look at our airports generally, you look at our roadways where they're crumbling.
You look at all of the things that are bad--  I'll give you an example. And this isn't part of what I was going to say, but I ride down the highways and somebody makes those guard rails.  You know the guard rails.  The ones that sort of go like this [demonstrates with hand] that are always  bent, rusted and horrible.  Did you ever see more than like 20 feet which isn't corroded, or bent or the heat, if it gets too hot, it just crushes.  Now they've been selling this thing for 25 years.  Why doesn't someone stop them and get something that works.  Because they don't know; they don't know what's happening.  Somebody made a lot of money on that.  They don't know what is happening.
So we have to make our country great again.  We have to rebuild our country.  And we have a long way to go.  We are just in such serious trouble because we owe so much money.  Now we owe it to the Chinese, a lot of it.  We owe it to other countries.  They're the ones that hold the debt.  And then we give them money.  We have countries that we owe money to and yet we're giving them subsidies.  I just ordered thousands of television sets and between LG and Samsung and I mean you know--  No American company comes to see and comes to bid.  It's South Korea, and whenever they have a problem we send the battleships, we send the destroyers, we send our airplanes, we're going to protect them.  What are we doing; why aren't they paying us?  Why aren't they paying us; what are we doing?  I order thousands and thousands of sets all the time, for some reason it's South Korea.  You know whether it's China, South Korea, but in this case televisions, South Korea.  Why aren't they doing something to justify what is going on?
Now, we have a very important election coming up.  We have a presidential election coming up. And we have some good people.  Nobody like Trump of course, but these are minor details.  We have some good people.
It' can't be Mitt because Mitt ran and failed.  He failed.  I mean I liked him.  Look--like him, dislike him--the 47% statement that he made, that's not going away.  The Romneycare from Massachusetts, that's not going away.  What do you think they're going to say oh we won't bring that up this time.  It's not fair because it was a long t--  That doesn't work.  But more importantly, he choked.  Something happened to him in the last month.  He had that election won.  And let me tell you something.  That election, sort of like a dealmaker that can't close the deal.  I know many of those guys; they get it up to the one-yard line, they go ah, ah I can't close it.  Or a golfer that can't sink the three-footer to win the tournament.  And there are many of them.  Most people are like that; I mean most people are like that.  You can't give somebody another chance, 'cause actually I think this election is tougher to win than beating a failed president.  I really do.  I think beating Obama would have been a much easier one than the one that's coming up, which is sad to say but true.  So you can't have Romney.  He choked.
You can't have Bush.  The last thing we need is another Bush.  Now I made that statement very strongly, and now every one says the last thing--  You know they copied it.  I'll be accused of copying the statement; that's the bad thing.  But I said it.  I was the one that said it first, and I mean it.  The last thing we need is another Bush.  Now, he's totally in favor of Common Core; that's a disaster, that's bad, it should be local and all of that.  But he's totally in favor of Common Core.  He's very, very weak on immigration.  Don't forget--remember his statement--they come for love.  I say, what?  Come for love?  You've got these people coming, half of them are criminals.  They're coming for love?  They're coming for a lot of other reasons, and it's not love.  And when he runs, you got to remember his brother really gave us Obama.  I was never a big fan, but his brother gave us Obama.  'Cause Abraham Lincoln coming home back from the dead could not have won the election because it was going so badly and the economy was just absolutely in shambles that last couple of months.  And then he appointed Justice Roberts.  And Jeb wanted Justice Roberts.  And Justice Roberts basically approved Obamacare in a shocking decision that nobody believes.  So you can't have Jeb Bush.  And he's going to lose aside from that; he's not going to win.  So Mitt and--you just can't have those two.  That's it.  That's it.  It's so simple.
So just in summing up and I just wrote a few of these little points down because it's very important.  And I watch these teleprompters, and by the way I think any president candidate that runs should not be allowed to use a teleprompter, because we got one that uses teleprompters.  And people say, oh he is so quick on his feet.  He is reading it.  I mean give me a break.  Everything is read.  You don't really test the mettle of a man or a woman unless they can get up on stage and talk.  And that's what we ended up getting--the king of teleprompters.  But, so when I look at these things here I say you know what, it's so much easier, it would be so nice, just bah, pa, bah, pa, bah, bing, bing, bing.  No problems, get off stage, everybody falls asleep and that's the end of that.  But we have to do something about these teleprompters.
But in looking at these situations--  I built an incredible company.  And you'll see that.  An incredible company; a wonderful company.  I employ thousands of people and I love doing what I'm doing.  And in a certain way, I wish I weren't doing this, but our country is in such trouble and would be so easy to fix.  We have such great potential.
So if I run for president and if I win, I would totally succeed in:
creating jobs;
defeating ISIS and stopping the Islamic terrorists--and you have to do that;
reducing the budget deficit--so important, have to do it;
securing our Southern border--and I mean seriously securing it;
stopping nuclear weapons in Iran and elsewhere;
saving Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid, without cutting it down to the bone because it's not fair to people that have been paying for their whole lives and other people and it's not fair to future people coming up, and we can do it;
repealing Obamacare and replacing it with something far better for the people, and far less expensive, both for the people and for the country.  And believe me there are plans that are so much better for everybody.  And everybody can be covered.  I'm not saying leave 50-percent of the people out.  Everybody can be c-- This plan is just a basic disaster.  Nobody knows.  As bad as the website was, this is how bad the plan itself is;
fixing our country's infrastructure, our bridges, our schools, our highways, our airports.  And that, I can tell you, nobody is close to Trump.  I just got the best hotel in North America.  I'm building, which is sort of interesting, think of this one.  I'm building one of the great hotels of the world on Pennsylvania Avenue, right opposite the White House, between the White House and Congress.  Right on Penn.--  The  Old Post Office site, and I got it from Obama.  Do you believe that?  And everybody wanted it.  So, I can't believe it myself.  But it's going to be fantastic;
and so many other things.
I know what needs to be done to make America great again.  We can make this country great again.  The potential is enormous.  And I am serious thinking of running for president because I can do the job.
Thank you all very much.  Thank you.  Thank you.  Thank you.  Thank you.  Thank you very much, everybody.  Thank you.  Beautiful.  Thank you.


SPEECH 2


Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you, and thank you to the Center for National Interest for honoring me with this invitation. It truly is a great honor. Id like to talk today about how to develop a new foreign policy direction for our country, one that replaces randomness with purpose, ideology with strategy, and chaos with peace.


Its time to shake the rust off Americas foreign policy. Its time to invite new voices and new visions into the fold, something we have to do. The direction I will outline today will also return us to a timeless principle. My foreign policy will always put the interests of the American people and American security above all else. It has to be first. Has to be.


That will be the foundation of every single decision that I will make.


America First will be the major and overriding theme of my administration. But to chart our path forward, we must first briefly take a look back. We have a lot to be proud of.


In the 1940s we saved the world. The greatest generation beat back the Nazis and Japanese imperialists. Then we saved the world again. This time, from totalitarianism and communism. The Cold War lasted for decades but, guess what, we won and we won big. Democrats and Republicans working together got Mr. Gorbachev to heed the words of President Reagan, our great president, when he said, tear down this wall.






History will not forget what he did. A very special man and president. Unfortunately, after the Cold War our foreign policy veered badly off course. We failed to develop a new vision for a new time. In fact, as time went on, our foreign policy began to make less and less sense. Logic was replaced with foolishness and arrogance, which led to one foreign policy disaster after another.


They just kept coming and coming. We went from mistakes in Iraq to Egypt to Libya, to President Obamas line in the sand in Syria. Each of these actions have helped to throw the region into chaos and gave ISIS the space it needs to grow and prosper. Very bad. It all began with a dangerous idea that we could make western democracies out of countries that had no experience or interests in becoming a western democracy.


We tore up what institutions they had and then were surprised at what we unleashed. Civil war, religious fanaticism, thousands of Americans and just killed be lives, lives, lives wasted. Horribly wasted. Many trillions of dollars were lost as a result. The vacuum was created that ISIS would fill. Iran, too, would rush in and fill that void much to their really unjust enrichment.


They have benefited so much, so sadly, for us. Our foreign policy is a complete and total disaster. No vision. No purpose. No direction. No strategy. Today I want to identify five main weaknesses in our foreign policy.


First, our resources are totally over extended. President Obama has weakened our military by weakening our economy. Hes crippled us with wasteful spending, massive debt, low growth, a huge trade deficit and open borders. Our manufacturing trade deficit with the world is now approaching $1 trillion a year.


Were rebuilding other countries while weakening our own. Ending the theft of American jobs will give us resources we need to rebuild our military, which has to happen and regain our financial independence and strength. I am the only person running for the presidency who understands this and this is a serious problem.
Im the only one  believe me, I know them all, Im the only one who knows how to fix it.






Secondly, our allies are not paying their fair share, and Ive been talking about this recently a lot. Our allies must contribute toward their financial, political, and human costs, have to do it, of our tremendous security burden. But many of them are simply not doing so.


They look at the United States as weak and forgiving and feel no obligation to honor their agreements with us. In NATO, for instance, only 4 of 28 other member countries besides America, are spending the minimum required 2 percent of GDP on defense. We have spent trillions of dollars over time on planes, missiles, ships, equipment, building up our military to provide a strong defense for Europe and Asia.


The countries we are defending must pay for the cost of this defense, and if not, the U.S. must be prepared to let these countries defend themselves. We have no choice.






The whole world will be safer if our allies do their part to support our common defense and security. A Trump administration will lead a free world that is properly armed and funded, and funded beautifully.


Thirdly, our friends are beginning to think they cant depend on us. Weve had a president who dislikes our friends and bows to our enemies, something that weve never seen before in the history of our country. He negotiated a disastrous deal with Iran, and then we watched them ignore its terms even before the ink was dry. Iran cannot be allowed to have a nuclear weapon, cannot be allowed. Remember that, cannot be allowed to have a nuclear weapon.




And under a Trump administration, will never, ever be allowed to have that nuclear weapon.




All of this without even mentioning the humiliation of the United States with Irans treatment of our ten captured sailors  so vividly I remember that day. In negotiation, you must be willing to walk. The Iran deal, like so many of our worst agreements, is the result of not being willing to leave the table.


When the other side knows youre not going to walk, it becomes absolutely impossible to win  you just cant win. At the same time, your friends need to know that you will stick by the agreements that you have with them. Youve made that agreement, you have to stand by it and the world will be a better place. President Obama gutted our missile defense program and then abandoned our missile defense plans with Poland and the Czech Republic. He supported the ouster of a friendly regime in Egypt that had a longstanding peace treaty with Israel, and then helped bring the Muslim Brotherhood to power in its place.


Israel, our great friend and the one true democracy in the Middle East has been snubbed and criticized by an administration that lacks moral clarity. Just a few days ago, Vice President Biden again criticized Israel, a force for justice and peace, for acting as an impatient peace area in the region.


President Obama has not been a friend to Israel. He has treated Iran with tender love and care and made it a great power. Iran has, indeed, become a great, great power in just a very short period of time, because of what weve done. All of the expense and all at the expense of Israel, our allies in the region and very importantly, the United States itself.


Weve picked fights with our oldest friends, and now theyre starting to look elsewhere for help. Remember that. Not good.
Fourth, our rivals no longer respect us. In fact, theyre just as confused as our allies, but in an even bigger problem is they dont take us seriously anymore. The truth is they dont respect us. When President Obama landed in Cuba on Air Force One, no leader was there, nobody, to greet him.


Perhaps an incident without precedent in the long and prestigious history of Air Force One. Then amazingly, the same thing happened in Saudi Arabia. Its called no respect. Absolutely no respect.


Do you remember when the president made a long and expensive trip to Copenhagen, Denmark, to get the Olympics for our country, and after this unprecedented effort, it was announced that the United States came in fourth  fourth place? The president of the United States making this trip  unprecedented  comes in fourth place. He should have known the result before making such an embarrassing commitment. We were laughed at all over the world, as we have been many, many times.


The list of humiliations go on and on and on. President Obama watches helplessly as North Korea increases its aggression and expands further and further with its nuclear reach. Our president has allowed China to continue its economic assault on American jobs and wealth, refusing to enforce trade deals and apply leverage on China necessary to rein in North Korea. We have the leverage. We have the power over China, economic power, and people dont understand it. And with that economic power, we can rein in and we can get them to do what they have to do with North Korea, which is totally out of control.


He has even allowed China to steal government secrets with cyber attacks and engaged in industrial espionage against the United States and its companies. Weve let our rivals and challengers think they can get away with anything, and they do. They do at will. It always happens. If President Obamas goal had been to weaken America, he could not have done a better job.


Finally, America no longer has a clear understanding of our foreign policy goals. Since the end of the Cold War and the breakup of the Soviet Union, weve lacked a coherent foreign policy. One day, were bombing Libya and getting rid of a dictator to foster democracy for civilians. The next day, were watching the same civilians suffer while that country falls and absolutely falls apart. Lives lost, massive moneys lost. The world is a different place.


Were a humanitarian nation, but the legacy of the Obama-Clinton interventions will be weakness, confusion and disarray, a mess. Weve made the Middle East more unstable and chaotic than ever before. We left Christians subject to intense persecution and even genocide.






We have done nothing to help the Christians, nothing, and we should always be ashamed for that, for that lack of action. Our actions in Iraq, Libya and Syria have helped unleash ISIS, and were in a war against radical Islam, but President Obama wont even name the enemy, and unless you name the enemy, you will never ever solve the problem.






Hillary Clinton also refuses to say the words radical Islam, even as she pushes for a massive increase in refugees coming into our country. After Secretary Clintons failed intervention in Libya, Islamic terrorists in Benghazi took down our consulate and killed our ambassador and three brave Americans. Then, instead of taking charge that night, Hillary Clinton decided to go home and sleep. Incredible.


Clinton blames it all on a video, an excuse that was a total lie, proven to be absolutely a total lie. Our ambassador was murdered and our secretary of state misled the nation. And, by the way, she was not awake to take that call at 3 oclock in the morning. And now ISIS is making millions and millions of dollars a week selling Libya oil. And you know what? We dont blockade, we dont bomb, we dont do anything about it. Its almost as if our country doesnt even know whats happening, which could be a fact and could be true. This will all change when I become president.


To our friends and allies, I say America is going to be strong again. America is going to be reliable again. Its going to be a great and reliable ally again. Its going to be a friend again. Were going to finally have a coherent foreign policy based upon American interests and the shared interests of our allies.






Were getting out of the nation-building business and instead focusing on creating stability in the world. Our moments of greatest strength came when politics ended at the waters edge. We need a new rational American foreign policy, informed by the best minds and supported by both parties, and it will be by both parties  Democrats, Republicans, independents, everybody, as well as by our close allies.




This is how we won the Cold War and its how we will win our new future struggles, which may be many, which may be complex, but we will win if I become president.






First, we need a long-term plan to halt the spread and reach of radical Islam. Containing the spread of radical Islam must be a major foreign policy goal of the United States and indeed the world. Events may require the use of military force, but its also a philosophical struggle, like our long struggle in the Cold War.


In this, were going to be working very closely with our allies in the Muslim world, all of which are at risk from radical Islamic violence, attacks and everything else. It is a dangerous world, more dangerous now than it has ever been.


We should work  thank you.






We should work together with any nation in the region that is threatened by the rise of radical Islam. But this has to be a two-way street. They must also be good to us. Remember that. They have to be good to us, no longer one way. Its now two-way. And remember, us and all were doing, they have to appreciate what weve done to them. Were going to help, but they have to appreciate what weve done for them. The struggle against radical Islam also takes place in our homeland. There are scores of recent migrants inside our borders charged with terrorism. For every case known to the public, there are dozens and dozens more. We must stop importing extremism through senseless immigration policies. We have no idea where these people are coming from. Theres no documentation. Theres no paperwork. Theres nothing. We have to be smart. We have to be vigilant.


A pause for reassessment will help us to prevent the next San Bernardino or frankly, much worse. All you have to do is look at the World Trade Center and September 11th, one of the great catastrophes, in my opinion, the single greatest military catastrophe in the history of our country; worse than Pearl Harbor because you take a look at whats happened, and citizens were attacked, as opposed to the military being attacked  one of the true great catastrophes.


And then theres ISIS. I have a simple message for them. Their days are numbered. I wont tell them where and I wont tell them how. We must...






... we must as a nation be more unpredictable. We are totally predictable. We tell everything. Were sending troops. We tell them. Were sending something else. We have a news conference. We have to be unpredictable. And we have to be unpredictable starting now.


But theyre going to be gone. ISIS will be gone if Im elected president. And theyll be gone quickly. They will be gone very, very quickly.






Secondly, we have to rebuild our military and our economy. The Russians and Chinese have rapidly expanded their military capability, but look at whats happened to us. Our nuclear weapons arsenal, our ultimate deterrent, has been allowed to atrophy and is desperately in need of modernization and renewal. And it has to happen immediately. Our active duty armed forces have shrunk from 2 million in 1991 to about 1.3 million today. The Navy has shrunk from over 500 ships to 272 ships during this same period of time. The Air Force is about one-third smaller than 1991. Pilots flying B-52s in combat missions today. These planes are older than virtually everybody in this room.


And what are we doing about this? President Obama has proposed a 2017 defense budget that in real dollars, cuts nearly 25 percent from what we were spending in 2011. Our military is depleted and were asking our generals and military leaders to worry about global warming.


We will spend what we need to rebuild our military. It is the cheapest, single investment we can make. We will develop, build and purchase the best equipment known to mankind. Our military dominance must be unquestioned, and I mean unquestioned, by anybody and everybody.


But we will look for savings and spend our money wisely. In this time of mounting debt, right now we have so much debt that nobody even knows how to address the problem. But I do. No one dollar can be wasted. Not one single dollar can we waste. Were also going to have to change our trade, immigration and economic policies to make our economy strong again. And to put Americans first again.




This will ensure that our own workers, right here in America, get the jobs and higher pay that will grow our tax revenues, increase our economic might as a nation, make us strong financially again. So, so important. We need to think smart about areas where our technological superiority, and nobody comes close, gives us an edge.


This includes 3D printing, artificial intelligence and cyber warfare. A great country also takes care of its warriors. Our commitment to them is absolute, and I mean absolute. A Trump administration will give our servicemen and women the best equipment and support in the world when they serve and where they serve. And the best care in the world when they return as veterans and they come back home to civilian life. Our veterans...






Our veterans have not been treated fairly or justly. These are our great people and we must treat them fairly. We must even treat them really, really well and that will happen under the Trump administration.






Finally, we must develop a foreign policy based on American interests. Businesses do not succeed when they lose sight of their core interests and neither do countries. Look at what happened in the 1990s. Our embassies in Kenya and Tanzania  and this was a horrible time for us  were attacked. and 17 brave sailors were killed on the U.S.S. Cole.


And what did we do? It seemed we put more effort into adding China into the World Trade organization, which has been a total disaster for the United States. Frankly, we spent more time on that than we did in stopping Al Qaeda. We even had an opportunity to take out Osama bin Laden and we didnt do it


And then we got hit at the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. Again, the worst attack on our country in its history. Our foreign policy goals must be based on Americas core national security interests. And the following will be my priorities.


In the Middle East our goals must be, and I mean must be, to defeat terrorists and promote regional stability, not radical change. We need to be clearsighted about the groups that will never be anything other than enemies. And believe me, we have groups that no matter what you do, they will be the enemy.: We have to be smart enough to recognize who those groups are, who those people are, and not help them. And we must only be generous to those that prove they are indeed our friends.






We desire to live peacefully and in friendship with Russia and China. We have serious differences with these two nations, and must regard them with open eyes, but we are not bound to be adversaries. We should seek common ground based on shared interests.


Russia, for instance, has also seen the horror of Islamic terrorism. I believe an easing of tensions, and improved relations with Russia from a position of strength only is possible, absolutely possible. Common sense says this cycle, this horrible cycle of hostility must end and ideally will end soon. Good for both countries.


Some say the Russians wont be reasonable. I intend to find out. If we cant make a deal under my administration, a deal thats great  not good, great  for America, but also good for Russia, then we will quickly walk from the table. Its as simple as that. Were going to find out.


Fixing our relations with China is another important step  and really toward creating an even more prosperous period of time. China respects strength and by letting them take advantage of us economically, which they are doing like never before, we have lost all of their respect.


We have a massive trade deficit with China, a deficit that we have to find a way quickly, and I mean quickly, to balance. A strong and smart America is an America that will find a better friend in China, better than we have right now. Look at what China is doing in the South China Sea. Theyre not supposed to be doing it.
No respect for this country or this president. We can both benefit or we can both go our separate ways. If need be, thats whats going to have to happen.


After Im elected president, I will also call for a summit with our NATO allies and a separate summit with our Asian allies. In these summits, we will not only discuss a rebalancing of financial commitments, but take a fresh look at how we can adopt new strategies for tackling our common challenges. For instance, we will discuss how we can upgrade NATOs outdated mission and structure, grown out of the Cold War to confront our shared challenges, including migration and Islamic terrorism.






I will not hesitate to deploy military force when there is no alternative. But if America fights, it must only fight to win.






I will never sent our finest into battle unless necessary, and I mean absolutely necessary, and will only do so if we have a plan for victory with a capital V.






Our goal is peace and prosperity, not war and destruction. The best way to achieve those goals is through a disciplined, deliberate and consistent foreign policy. With President Obama and Secretary Clinton weve had the exact opposite  a reckless, rudderless and aimless foreign policy, one that has blazed the path of destruction in its wake.


After losing thousands of lives and spending trillions of dollars, we are in far worst shape in the Middle East than ever, ever before. I challenge anyone to explain the strategic foreign policy vision of Obama/Clinton. It has been a complete and total disaster.


I will also be prepared to deploy Americas economic resources. Financial leverage and sanctions can be very, very persuasive, but we need to use them selectively and with total determination. Our power will be used if others do not play by the rules. In other words, if they do not treat us fairly. Our friends and enemies must know that if I draw a line in the sand, I will enforce that line in the sand. Believe me.






However, unlike other candidates for the presidency, war and aggression will not be my first instinct. You cannot have a foreign policy without diplomacy. A superpower understands that caution and restraint are really truly signs of strength. Although not in government service, I was totally against the war in Iraq, very proudly, saying for many years that it would destabilize the Middle East. Sadly, I was correct, and the biggest beneficiary has been has been Iran, who is systematically taking over Iraq and gaining access to their very rich oil reserves, something it has wanted to do for decades.


And now, to top it off, we have ISIS. My goal is to establish a foreign policy that will endure for several generations. Thats why I also look and have to look for talented experts with approaches and practical ideas, rather than surrounding myself with those who have perfect rsums but very little to brag about except responsibility for a long history of failed policies and continued losses at war. We have to look to new people.






We have to look to new people because many of the old people frankly dont know what theyre doing, even though they may look awfully good writing in The New York Times or being watched on television.


Finally, I will work with our allies to reinvigorate Western values and institutions. Instead of trying to spread universal values that not everybody shares or wants, we should understand that strengthening and promoting Western civilization and its accomplishments will do more to inspire positive reforms around the world than military interventions.






These are my goals as president. I will seek a foreign policy that all Americans, whatever their party, can support, so important, and which our friends and allies will respect and totally welcome. The world must know that we do not go abroad in search of enemies, that we are always happy when old enemies become friends and when old friends become allies, thats what we want. We want them to be our allies.


We want the world to be  we want to bring peace to the world. Too much destruction out there, too many destructive weapons. The power of weaponry is the single biggest problem that we have today in the world.


To achieve these goals, Americans must have confidence in their country and its leadership. Again, many Americans must wonder why we our politicians seem more interested in defending the borders of foreign countries than in defending their own. Americans.






Americans must know that were putting the American people first again on trade.






So true. On trade, on immigration, on foreign policy. The jobs, incomes and security of the American worker will always be my first priority.






No country has ever prospered that failed to put its own interests first. Both our friends and our enemies put their countries above ours and we, while being fair to them, must start doing the same. We will no longer surrender this country or its people to the false song of globalism. The nation-state remains the true foundation for happiness and harmony. I am skeptical of international unions that tie us up and bring America down and will never enter.






And under my administration, we will never enter America into any agreement that reduces our ability to control our own affairs.






NAFTA, as an example, has been a total disaster for the United States and has emptied our states  literally emptied our states of our manufacturing and our jobs. And Ive just gotten to see it. Ive toured Pennsylvania. Ive toured New York. Ive toured so many of the states. They have been cleaned out. Their manufacturing is gone.


Never again, only the reverse  and I have to say this strongly  never again; only the reverse will happen. We will keep our jobs and bring in new ones. There will be consequences for the companies that leave the United States only to exploit it later. They fire the people. They take advantage of the United States. There will be consequences for those companies. Never again.


Under a Trump administration, no American citizen will ever again feel that their needs come second to the citizens of a foreign country.






I will view as president the world through the clear lens of American interests. I will be Americas greatest defender and most loyal champion. We will not apologize for becoming successful again, but will instead embrace the unique heritage that makes us who we are.


The world is most peaceful and most prosperous when America is strongest. America will continue and continue forever to play the role of peacemaker. We will always help save lives and indeed humanity itself, but to play the role, we must make America strong again.






And always  always, always, we must make, and we have to look at it from every angle, and we have no choice, we must make America respected again. We must make America truly wealthy again. And we must  we have to and we will make America great again. And if we do that  and if we do that, perhaps this century can be the most peaceful and prosperous the world has ever, ever known. Thank you very much, everybody. I appreciate it. Thank you.


SPEECH 3


A hand with little fingers coming out of a stem. Like, little. Look at my hands. Theyre fine. Nobody other than Graydon Carter years ago used to use that. My hands are normal hands. During a debate, he was losing, and he said, "Oh, he has small hands and therefore, you know what that means." This was not me. This was Rubio that said, "He has small hands and you know what that means." Okay? So, he started it. So, what I said a couple of days later ... and what happened is I was on line shaking hands with supporters, and one of supporters got up and he said, "Mr. Trump, you have strong hands. You have good-sized hands." And then another one would say, "You have great hands, Mr. Trump, I had no idea." I said, "What do you mean?" He said, "I thought you were like deformed, and I thought you had small hands." I had fifty people ... Is that a correct statement? I mean people were writing, "How are Mr. Trumps hands?" My hands are fine. You know, my hands are normal. Slightly large, actually. In fact, I buy a slightly smaller than large glove, okay? No, but I did this because everybody was saying to me, "Oh, your hands are very nice. They are normal." So Rubio, in a debate, said, because he had nothing else to say ... now I was hitting him pretty hard. He wanted to do his Don Rickles stuff and it didnt work out. Obviously, it didnt work too well. But one of the things he said was "He has small hands and therefore, you know what that means, he has small something else." You can look it up. I didnt say it.


 I dont want people to go around thinking that I have a problem. Im telling you, Ruth, I had so many people. I would say 25, 30 people would tell me ... every time Id shake peoples hand, "Oh, you have nice hands." Why shouldnt I? And, by the way, by saying that I solved the problem. Nobody questions ... I even held up my hands, and said, "Look, take a look at that hand."


  I dont know if it was presidential, honestly, whether it is or not. He said, Donald Trump has small hands and therefore he has small something else. I didnt say that. And all I did is when he failed, when he was failing, when he was, when Christie made him look bad, I gave him the a little recap and I said, and I said, and I had this big strong powerful hand ready to grab him, because I thought he was going to faint. And everybody took it fine. Whether it was presidential or not I cant tell you. I can just say that what he said was a lie. And everybody, they wanted to do stories on my hands; after I said that, they never did. And then I held up the hand, I showed people the hand. You know, when Ive got a big audience. So yeah, I think its not a question of presidential ...


SPEECH 4


  Oh boy. We love Nevada. We love Nevada. Thank you. Thank you. Oh this is a great place. Thank you very much. Great evening. We will be celebrating for a long time tonight. Have a good time. Have a good time.
You know we werent expectinga couple of months ago, we werent expecting to win this one, you know that, right? We werent. Of course if you listen to the pundits, we werent expected to win too much, and now were winning, winning, winning the country. And soon the countrys going to start winning, winning, winning. So I want to thank the volunteers. Theyve been unbelievable. These people, they work like endlessly, endlessly. Were not going to forget it. And weve had some great numbers coming out of Texas, and amazing numbers coming out of Tennessee and Georgia and Arkansas and then in a couple of weeks later Florida. We love Florida so. Were going to do very well in Ohio. Were beating the governor. Its always nice to be beating the governor. And Michiganthe whole thing. Its going to be an amazing two months.
We might not even need the two months, folks, to be honest. So tonight we had 45 to 46%, and tomorrow youd hear them say, you know, if they could just take the other candidates and add them up, and if you could add them up because you know the other candidates amount to 55%. So if they couldthey keep forgetting that when people drop out, were going to get a lot of votes. You know they keep forgetting.
So I want to begin by thanking my boys, Eric has been all over the place making speeches. Hes getting better than me so Im a little jealous. And Don went to _____, you were all over, right?
He loves the rifle stuff. This is serious rifle. This is serious NRA, both of them, both of them. We love the Second Amendment folks. Nobody loves it more than us, so just remember that.
And Corey and Hope, the staff, the whole group, and Charles and Dan and what a group we have. I want to just thank a couple of friends of mine that are here, the owner of this incredible hotel, Mr. and Mrs. Phil Ruffin, stand up. Great guy. Phil said, "Donald,"like for the last three months hes driving me crazy, he said"Donald, I want to put $10 million into your campaign." I said, "Phil I dont want your money. I dont want to do it. Im self funding." Every time I see him. Its hard for me to turn down money because thats what Ive done in my whole life. I grab and grab and grab. You know I get greedy. I want money, money.
Ill tell you what were going to do, right? We get greedy, right? Now were going to get greedy for the United States. Were going to grab and grab and grab. Were going to bring in so much money and so much everything. Were going to make America great again, folks, Im telling you folks, were going to make America great again.
And another great friend of mine, someone respected by everybody, a great friend of Phil tooMr. and Mrs. Steve Wynn. Stand up, Steve. Stand up. Two great people. Steve is always calling. Hes always got advice, right Steve? "Donald I think you should do this and that." His advice I like to listen to, Ill be honest. So Phil and Steve and families, we appreciate it. Youve been great friends. Thank you, thank you.
So this was very exciting tonight. But Ill tell you it looks like we won by a lot evangelicals. I love evangelicals, and I have to tell you pastor [Robert] Jeffress has been so incredible on television and elsewhere. He has been great. And as you know Liberty Universitydo we love Liberty University? Huh? Jerry Falwell Jr., an unbelievable guy, and he has been with us and with us from the beginning, and I want to thank Jerry and his family. Its been amazing, the relationship. So we won the evangelicals.
We won with young. We won with old. We won with highly educated. We won with poorly educated. I love the poorly educated. Were the smartest people, were the most loyal people, and you know what Im happy about? Because Ive been saying it for a long time. 46% were the Hispanics46%, No. 1 one with Hispanics. Im really happy about that.
So Im very proud of you, this is an amazing night. I love the country, I love the country. Were going in the wrong direction. Were going to keepas you know Gitmo, were keeping that open, and were going to load it up with bad dudes. Were going to load it up w a lot of bad dudes out there. Were going to have our borders nice and strong. Were going to build the wall, you know that. Were going to build the wall. And I have a lot of respect from Mexico, and you just heard we won Hispanics. But let me tell you Mexico is going to pay for the wall, right? Its going to happen. Its going to happen. They know it. I know it. We all know it.
We have a tremendous deficit. We have a trade deficit with Mexico. Theyll pay for the wall. Theyll be very happy about it. Believe me. Ill talk to them. Theyre going to be very, very thrilled. Theyre going to be thrilled to be paying for the wall.
Were going to be the smart people. Were not going to be the people that get pushed around all over the place. Were going to be the smart people. Youre going to be proud of your president, and youre going to be even prouder of your country, OK?
So tonight folks, this was a great evening. I love this place. I love this state. I love Las Vegas. I have spent and invested so much money over here. Trump International HotelI keep telling Steve we have the best hotel in Las Vegas. Hes fighting me all the time. But thats OK. But I just want to say its a great state, and they have great people. And I was so proud. You know, I went to caucus. I was all over the place tonight. The people are amazing. The enthusiasm, it was unbelievable to see.
The people of this country are absolutely amazing. I love you folks very much. Remember: Make America great again. Were going to do it, and its going to happen fast. Thank you very much everybody. We love you. We love you.


SPEECH 5


Wow. Whoa. That is some group of people. Thousands.


So nice, thank you very much. Thats really nice. Thank you. Its great to be at Trump Tower. Its great to be in a wonderful city, New York. And its an honor to have everybody here. This is beyond anybodys expectations. Theres been no crowd like this.


And, I can tell, some of the candidates, they went in. They didnt know the air-conditioner didnt work. They sweated like dogs.






They didnt know the room was too big, because they didnt have anybody there. How are they going to beat ISIS? I dont think its gonna happen.






Our country is in serious trouble. We dont have victories anymore. We used to have victories, but we dont have them. When was the last time anybody saw us beating, lets say, China in a trade deal? They kill us. I beat China all the time. All the time.


When did we beat Japan at anything? They send their cars over by the millions, and what do we do? When was the last time you saw a Chevrolet in Tokyo? It doesnt exist, folks. They beat us all the time.


When do we beat Mexico at the border? Theyre laughing at us, at our stupidity. And now they are beating us economically. They are not our friend, believe me. But theyre killing us economically.


The U.S. has become a dumping ground for everybody elses problems.


SPEECH 6


Thank you. Its true, and these are the best and the finest. When Mexico sends its people, theyre not sending their best. Theyre not sending you. Theyre not sending you. Theyre sending people that have lots of problems, and theyre bringing those problems with us. Theyre bringing drugs. Theyre bringing crime. Theyre rapists. And some, I assume, are good people.


oh And it only makes common sense. It only makes common sense. Theyre sending us not the right people.


Its coming from more than Mexico. Its coming from all over South and Latin America, and its coming probably  probably  from the Middle East. But we dont know. Because we have no protection and we have no competence, we dont know whats happening. And its got to stop and its got to stop fast.


Islamic terrorism is eating up large portions of the Middle East. Theyve become rich. Im in competition with them.


They just built a hotel in Syria. Can you believe this? They built a hotel. When I have to build a hotel, I pay interest. They dont have to pay interest, because they took the oil that, when we left Iraq, I said we shouldve taken.


So now ISIS has the oil, and what they dont have, Iran has. And in 19  and I will tell you this, and I said it very strongly, years ago, I said  and I love the military, and I want to have the strongest military that weve ever had, and we need it more now than ever. But I said, "Dont hit Iraq," because youre going to totally destabilize the Middle East. Iran is going to take over the Middle East, Iran and somebody else will get the oil, and it turned out that Iran is now taking over Iraq. Think of it. Iran is taking over Iraq, and theyre taking it over big league.


We spent $2 trillion in Iraq, $2 trillion. We lost thousands of lives, thousands in Iraq. We have wounded soldiers, who I love, I love  theyre great  all over the place, thousands and thousands of wounded soldiers.


And we have nothing. We cant even go there. We have nothing. And every time we give Iraq equipment, the first time a bullet goes off in the air, they leave it.


Last week, I read 2,300 Humvees  these are big vehicles  were left behind for the enemy. 2,000? You would say maybe two, maybe four? 2,300 sophisticated vehicles, they ran, and the enemy took them.
Last quarter, it was just announced our gross domestic product  a sign of strength, right? But not for us. It was below zero. Whoever heard of this? Its never below zero.


Our labor participation rate was the worst since 1978. But think of it, GDP below zero, horrible labor participation rate.


And our real unemployment is anywhere from 18 to 20 percent. Dont believe the 5.6. Dont believe it.


Thats right. A lot of people up there cant get jobs. They cant get jobs, because there are no jobs, because China has our jobs and Mexico has our jobs. They all have jobs.


But the real number, the real number is anywhere from 18 to 19 and maybe even 21 percent, and nobody talks about it, because its a statistic thats full of nonsense.


Our enemies are getting stronger and stronger by the way, and we as a country are getting weaker. Even our nuclear arsenal doesnt work.


It came out recently they have equipment that is 30 years old. They dont know if it worked. And I thought it was horrible when it was broadcast on television, because boy, does that send signals to Putin and all of the other people that look at us and they say, "That is a group of people, and that is a nation that truly has no clue. They dont know what theyre doing. They dont know what theyre doing."


We have a disaster called the big lie: Obamacare. Obamacare.


Yesterday, it came out that costs are going for people up 29, 39, 49, and even 55 percent, and deductibles are through the roof. You have to be hit by a tractor, literally, a tractor, to use it, because the deductibles are so high, its virtually useless. Its virtually useless. It is a disaster.TRUMP: And remember the $5 billion Web site? $5 billion we spent on a Web site, and to this day it doesnt work. A $5 billion Web site.


If and when the Vatican is attacked by ISIS, which as everyone knows is ISISs ultimate trophy, I can promise you that the Pope would have only wished and prayed that Donald Trump would have been President because this would not have happened. ISIS would have been eradicated unlike what is happening now with our all talk, no action politicians.


The Mexican government and its leadership has made many disparaging remarks about me to the Pope, because they want to continue to rip off the United States, both on trade and at the border, and they understand I am totally wise to them. The Pope only heard one side of the story - he didnt see the crime, the drug trafficking and the negative economic impact the current policies have on the United States. He doesnt see how Mexican leadership is outsmarting President Obama and our leadership in every aspect of negotiation.


For a religious leader to question a persons faith is disgraceful. I am proud to be a Christian and as President I will not allow Christianity to be consistently attacked and weakened, unlike what is happening now, with our current President. No leader, especially a religious leader, should have the right to question another mans religion or faith. They are using the Pope as a pawn and they should be ashamed of themselves for doing so, especially when so many lives are involved and when illegal immigration is so rampant.


I have so many Web sites, I have them all over the place. I hire people, they do a Web site. It costs me $3. $5 billion Web site.
Well, you need somebody, because politicians are all talk, no action. Nothings gonna get done. They will not bring us  believe me  to the promised land. They will not.


As an example, Ive been on the circuit making speeches, and I hear my fellow Republicans. And theyre wonderful people. I like them. They all want me to support them. They dont know how to bring it about. They come up to my office. Im meeting with three of them in the next week. And they dont know  "Are you running? Are you not running? Could we have your support? What do we do? How do we do it?"


I like them. And I hear their speeches. And they dont talk jobs and they dont talk China. When was the last time you heard China is killing us? Theyre devaluing their currency to a level that you wouldnt believe. It makes it impossible for our companies to compete, impossible. Theyre killing us.


But you dont hear that from anybody else. You dont hear it from anybody else. And I watch the speeches.
Thank you.


I watch the speeches of these people, and they say the sun will rise, the moon will set, all sorts of wonderful things will happen. And people are saying, "Whats going on? I just want a job. Just get me a job. I dont need the rhetoric. I want a job."


And thats whats happening. And its going to get worse, because remember, Obamacare really kicks in in 16, 2016. Obama is going to be out playing golf. He might be on one of my courses. I would invite him, I actually would say. I have the best courses in the world, so Id say, you what, if he wants to  I have one right next to the White House, right on the Potomac. If hed like to play, thats fine.






In fact, Id love him to leave early and play, that would be a very good thing.






But Obamacare kicks in in 2016. Really big league. It is going to be amazingly destructive. Doctors are quitting. I have a friend whos a doctor, and he said to me the other day, "Donald, I never saw anything like it. I have more accountants than I have nurses. Its a disaster. My patients are beside themselves. They had a plan that was good. They have no plan now."


We have to repeal Obamacare, and it can be  and  and it can be replaced with something much better for everybody. Let it be for everybody. But much better and much less expensive for people and for the government. And we can do it.
So Ive watched the politicians. Ive dealt with them all my life. If you cant make a good deal with a politician, then theres something wrong with you. Youre certainly not very good. And thats what we have= representing us. They will never make America great again. They dont even have a chance. Theyre controlled fully  theyre controlled fully by the lobbyists, by the donors, and by the special interests, fully.


Yes, they control them. Hey, I have lobbyists. I have to tell you. I have lobbyists that can produce anything for me. Theyre great. But you know what? it wont happen. It wont happen. Because we have to stop doing things for some people, but for this country, its destroying our country. We have to stop, and it has to stop now.


We need a leader that can bring back our jobs, can bring back our manufacturing, can bring back our military, can take care of our vets. Our vets have been abandoned.






And we also need a cheerleader.


You know, when President Obama was elected, I said, "Well, the one thing, I think hell do well. I think hell be a great cheerleader for the country. I think hed be a great spirit."


He was vibrant. He was young. I really thought that he would be a great cheerleader.


Hes not a leader. Thats true. Youre right about that.


But he wasnt a cheerleader. Hes actually a negative force. Hes been a negative force. He wasnt a cheerleader; he was the opposite.


We need somebody that can take the brand of the United States and make it great again. Its not great again.


We need  we need somebody  we need somebody that literally will take this country and make it great again. We can do that.






And, I will tell you, I love my life. I have a wonderful family. Theyre saying, "Dad, youre going to do something thats going to be so tough."


You know, all of my life, Ive heard that a truly successful person, a really, really successful person and even modestly successful cannot run for public office. Just cant happen. And yet thats the kind of mindset that you need to make this country great again.


So ladies and gentlemen...






I am officially running...






... for president of the United States, and we are going to make our country great again.






It can happen. Our country has tremendous potential. We have tremendous people.


We have people that arent working. We have people that have no incentive to work. But theyre going to have incentive to work, because the greatest social program is a job. And theyll be proud, and theyll love it, and theyll make much more than they wouldve ever made, and theyll be  theyll be doing so well, and were going to be thriving as a country, thriving. It can happen.






I will be the greatest jobs president that God ever created. I tell you that.






Ill bring back our jobs from China, from Mexico, from Japan, from so many places. Ill bring back our jobs, and Ill bring back our money.


Right now, think of this: We owe China $1.3 trillion. We owe Japan more than that. So they come in, they take our jobs, they take our money, and then they loan us back the money, and we pay them in interest, and then the dollar goes up so their deals even better.


How stupid are our leaders? How stupid are these politicians to allow this to happen? How stupid are they?






Im going to tell you  thank you. Im going to tell you a couple of stories about trade, because Im totally against the trade bill for a number of reasons.


Number one, the people negotiating dont have a clue. Our president doesnt have a clue. Hes a bad negotiator.


Hes the one that did Bergdahl. We get Bergdahl, they get five killer terrorists that everybody wanted over there.


We get Bergdahl. We get a traitor. We get a no-good traitor, and they get the five people that they wanted for years, and those people are now back on the battlefield trying to kill us. Thats the negotiator we have.


Take a look at the deal hes making with Iran. He makes that deal, Israel maybe wont exist very long. Its a disaster, and we have to protect Israel. But...
So we need people  Im a free trader. But the problem with free trade is you need really talented people to negotiate for you. If you dont have talented people, if you dont have great leadership, if you dont have people that know business, not just a political hack that got the job because he made a contribution to a campaign, which is the way all jobs, just about, are gotten, free trade terrible.


Free trade can be wonderful if you have smart people, but we have people that are stupid. We have people that arent smart. And we have people that are controlled by special interests. And its just not going to work.


So, heres a couple of stories happened recently. A friend of mine is a great manufacturer. And, you know, China comes over and they dump all their stuff, and I buy it. I buy it, because, frankly, I have an obligation to buy it, because they devalue their currency so brilliantly, they just did it recently, and nobody thought they could do it again.


But with all our problems with Russia, with all our problems with everything  everything, they got away with it again. And its impossible for our people here to compete.


So I want to tell you this story. A friend of mine whos a great manufacturer, calls me up a few weeks ago. Hes very upset. I said, "Whats your problem?"


He said, "You know, I make great product."


And I said, "I know. I know that because I buy the product."


He said, "I cant get it into China. They wont accept it. I sent a boat over and they actually sent it back. They talked about environmental, they talked about all sorts of crap that had nothing to do with it."


I said, "Oh, wait a minute, thats terrible. Does anyone know this?"


He said, "Yeah, they do it all the time with other people."


I said, "They send it back?"


"Yeah. So I finally got it over there and they charged me a big tariff. Theyre not supposed to be doing that. I told them."


Now, they do charge you tariff on trucks, when we send trucks and other things over there.


Ask Boeing. They wanted Boeings secrets. They wanted their patents and all their secrets before they agreed to buy planes from Boeing.


Hey, Im not saying theyre stupid. I like China. I sell apartments for  I just sold an apartment for $15 million to somebody from China. Am I supposed to dislike them? I own a big chunk of the Bank of America Building at 1290 Avenue of the Americas, that I got from China in a war. Very valuable.


I love China. The biggest bank in the world is from China. You know where their United States headquarters is located? In this building, in Trump Tower. I love China. People say, "Oh, you dont like China?"


No, I love them. But their leaders are much smarter than our leaders, and we cant sustain ourself with that. Theres too much  its like  its like take the New England Patriots and Tom Brady and have them play your high school football team. Thats the difference between Chinas leaders and our leaders.


They are ripping us. We are rebuilding China. Were rebuilding many countries. China, you go there now, roads, bridges, schools, you never saw anything like it. They have bridges that make the George Washington Bridge look like small potatoes. And theyre all over the place.


We have all the cards, but we dont know how to use them. We dont even know that we have the cards, because our leaders dont understand the game. We could turn off that spigot by charging them tax until they behave properly.


Now theyre going militarily. Theyre building a military island in the middle of the South China sea. A military island. Now, our country could never do that because wed have to get environmental clearance, and the environmentalist wouldnt let our country  we would never build in an ocean. They built it in about one year, this massive military port.


Theyre building up their military to a point that is very scary. You have a problem with ISIS. You have a bigger problem with China.


And, in my opinion, the new China, believe it or not, in terms of trade, is Mexico.


So this man tells me about the manufacturing. I say, "Thats a terrible story. I hate to hear it."


But I have another one, Ford.


So Mexico takes a company, a car company that was going to build in Tennessee, rips it out. Everybody thought the deal was dead. Reported it in the Wall Street Journal recently. Everybody thought it was a done deal. Its going in and thats going to be it, going into Tennessee. Great state, great people.TRUMP: All of a sudden, at the last moment, this big car manufacturer, foreign, announces theyre not going to Tennessee. Theyre gonna spend their $1 billion in Mexico instead. Not good.


Now, Ford announces a few weeks ago that Ford is going to build a $2.5 billion car and truck and parts manufacturing plant in Mexico. $2.5 billion, its going to be one of the largest in the world. Ford. Good company.


So I announced that Im running for president. I would...






... one of the early things I would do, probably before I even got in  and I wouldnt even use  you know, I have  I know the smartest negotiators in the world. I know the good ones. I know the bad ones. I know the overrated ones.


You get a lot of them that are overrated. Theyre not good. They think they are. They get good stories, because the newspapers get buffaloed (ph). But theyre not good.


But I know the negotiators in the world, and I put them one for each country. Believe me, folks. We will do very, very well, very, very well.


But I wouldnt even waste my time with this one. I would call up the head of Ford, who I know. If I was president, Id say, "Congratulations. I understand that youre building a nice $2.5 billion car factory in Mexico and that youre going to take your cars and sell them to the United States zero tax, just flow them across the border."


And you say to yourself, "How does that help us," right? "How does that help us? Where is that good"? Its not.


So I would say, "Congratulations. Thats the good news. Let me give you the bad news. Every car and every truck and every part manufactured in this plant that comes across the border, were going to charge you a 35-percent tax, and that tax is going to be paid simultaneously with the transaction, and thats it.


Now, heres what is going to happen. If its not me in the position, its one of these politicians that were running against, you know, the 400 people that were (inaudible). And heres whats going to happen. Theyre not so stupid. They know its not a good thing, and they may even be upset by it. But then theyre going to get a call from the donors or probably from the lobbyist for Ford and say, "You cant do that to Ford, because Ford takes care of me and I take care of you, and you cant do that to Ford."


And guess what? No problem. Theyre going to build in Mexico. Theyre going to take away thousands of jobs. Its very bad for us.


So under President Trump, heres what would happen:






The head of Ford will call me back, I would say within an hour after I told them the bad news. But it could be hed want to be cool, and hell wait until the next day. You know, they want to be a little cool.


And hell say, "Please, please, please." Hell beg for a little while, and Ill say, "No interest." Then hell call all sorts of political people, and Ill say, "Sorry, fellas. No interest," because I dont need anybodys money. Its nice. I dont need anybodys money.


Im using my own money. Im not using the lobbyists. Im not using donors. I dont care. Im really rich. I (inaudible).






And by the way, Im not even saying that in a  thats the kind of mindset, thats the kind of thinking you need for this country.
So  because we got to make the country rich.


It sounds crass. Somebody said, "Oh, thats crass." Its not crass.


We got $18 trillion in debt. We got nothing but problems.


We got a military that needs equipment all over the place. We got nuclear weapons that are obsolete.


Weve got nothing. Weve got Social Security thats going to be destroyed if somebody like me doesnt bring money into the country. All these other people want to cut the hell out of it. Im not going to cut it at all; Im going to bring money in, and were going to save it.






But heres whats going to happen:


After Im called by 30 friends of mine who contributed to different campaigns, after Im called by all of the special interests and by the  the donors and by the lobbyists  and they have zero chance at convincing me, zero  Ill get a call the next day from the head of Ford. Hell say. "Please reconsider," Ill say no.


Hell say, "Mr. President, weve decided to move the plant back to the United States, and were not going to build it in Mexico." Thats it. They have no choice. They have no choice.


There are hundreds of things like that. Ill give you another example.TRUMP: Saudi Arabia, they make $1 billion a day. $1 billion a day. I love the Saudis. Many are in this building. They make a billion dollars a day. Whenever they have problems, we send over the ships. We say "were gonna protect." What are we doing? Theyve got nothing but money.


If the right person asked them, theyd pay a fortune. They wouldnt be there except for us.


And believe me, you look at the border with Yemen. You remember Obama a year ago, Yemen was a great victory. Two weeks later, the place was blown up. Everybody got out  and they kept our equipment.


They always keep our equipment. We ought to send used equipment, right? They always keep our equipment. We ought to send some real junk, because, frankly, it would be  we ought to send our surplus. Were always losing this gorgeous brand-new stuff.


But look at that border with Saudi Arabia. Do you really think that these people are interested in Yemen? Saudi Arabia without us is gone. They;re gone.


And Im the one that made all of the right predictions about Iraq. You know, all of these politicians that Im running against now  its so nice to say Im running as opposed to if I run, if I run. Im running.






But all of these politicians that Im running against now, theyre trying to disassociate. I mean, you looked at Bush, it took him five days to answer the question on Iraq. He couldnt answer the question. He didnt know. I said, "Is he intelligent?"


Then I looked at Rubio. He was unable to answer the question, is Iraq a good thing or bad thing? He didnt know. He couldnt answer the question.


How are these people gonna lead us? How are we gonna  how are we gonna go back and make it great again? We cant. They dont have a clue. They cant lead us. They cant. They cant even answer simple questions. It was terrible.


But Saudi Arabia is in big, big trouble. Now, thanks to fracking and other things, the oil is all over the place. And I used to say it, there are ships at sea, and this was during the worst crisis, that were loaded up with oil, and the cartel kept the price up, because, again, they were smarter than our leaders. They were smarter than our leaders.


There is so much wealth out there that can make our country so rich again, and therefore make it great again. Because we need money. Were dying. Were dying. We need money. We have to do it. And we need the right people.


So Ford will come back. Theyll all come back. And I will say this, this is going to be an election, in my opinion, thats based on competence.


So the reporter said to me the other day, "But, Mr. Trump, youre not a nice person. How can you get people to vote for you?"


I said, "I dont know." I said, "I think that number one, I am a nice person. I give a lot of money away to charities and other things. I think Im actually a very nice person."


But, I said, "This is going to be an election thats based on competence, because people are tired of these nice people. And theyre tired of being ripped off by everybody in the world. And theyre tired of spending more money on education than any nation in the world per capita, than any nation in the world, and we are 26th in the world, 25 countries are better than us in education. And some of them are like third world countries. But were becoming a third word country, because of our infrastructure, our airports, our roads, everything. So one of the things I did, and I said, you know what Ill do. Ill do it. Because a lot of people said, "Hell never run. Number one, he wont want to give up his lifestyle."


Theyre right about that, but Im doing it.


Number two, Im a private company, so nobody knows what Im worth. And the one thing is that when you run, you have to announce and certify to all sorts of governmental authorities your net worth.


So I said, "Thats OK." Im proud of my net worth. Ive done an amazing job.


I started off  thank you  I started off in a small office with my father in Brooklyn and Queens, and my father said  and I love my father. I learned so much. He was a great negotiator. I learned so much just sitting at his feet playing with blocks listening to him negotiate with subcontractors. But I learned a lot.


But he used to say, "Donald, dont go into Manhattan. Thats the big leagues. We dont know anything about that. Dont do it."


I said, "I gotta go into Manhattan. I gotta build those big buildings. I gotta do it, Dad. Ive gotta do it."


And after four or five years in Brooklyn, I ventured into Manhattan and did a lot of great deals  the Grand Hyatt Hotel. I was responsible for the convention center on the west side. I did a lot of great deals, and I did them early and young. And now Im building all over the world, and I love what Im doing.


But they all said, a lot of the pundits on television, "Well, Donald will never run, and one of the main reasons is hes private and hes probably not as successful as everybody thinks."


So I said to myself, you know, nobodys ever going to know unless I run, because Im really proud of my success. I really am.






Ive employed  Ive employed tens of thousands of people over my lifetime. That means medical. That means education. That means everything.


So a large accounting firm and my accountants have been working for months, because its big and complex, and theyve put together a statement, a financial statement, just a summary. But everything will be filed eventually with the government, and we dont extensions or anything. Well be filing it right on time. We dont need anything.






And it was even reported incorrectly yesterday, because they said, "He had assets of $9 billion." So I said (ph), "No, thats the wrong number. Thats the wrong number. Not assets."


So they put together this. And before I say it, I have to say this. I made it the old-fashioned way. Its real estate. You know, its real estate.


Its labor, and its unions good and some bad and lots of people that arent in unions, and its all over the place and building all over the world.


And I have assets  big accounting firm, one of the most highly respected  9 billion 240 million dollars.


And I have liabilities of about $500 million (ph). Thats long-term debt, very low interest rates.


In fact, one of the big banks came to me and said, "Donald, you dont have enough borrowings. Could we loan you $4 billion"? I said, "I dont need it. I dont want it. And Ive been there. I dont want it."


But in two seconds, they give me whatever I wanted. So I have a total net worth, and now with the increase, itll be well-over $10 billion. But here, a total net worth of  net worth, not assets, not  a net worth, after all debt, after all expenses, the greatest assets  Trump Tower, 1290 Avenue of the Americas, Bank of America building in San Francisco, 40 Wall Street, sometimes referred to as the Trump building right opposite the New York  many other places all over the world.


So the total is $8,737,540,00.


Now Im not doing that...






Im not doing that to brag, because you know what? I dont have to brag. I dont have to, believe it or not.


Im doing that to say that thats the kind of thinking our country needs. We need that thinking. We have the opposite thinking.


We have losers. We have losers. We have people that dont have it. We have people that are morally corrupt. We have people that are selling this country down the drain.


So I put together this statement, and the only reason Im telling you about it today is because we really do have to get going, because if we have another three or four years  you know, were at $8 trillion now. Were soon going to be at $20 trillion.TRUMP: According to the economists  who Im not big believers in, but, nevertheless, this is what theyre saying  that $24 trillion  were very close  thats the point of no return. $24 trillion. We will be there soon. Thats when we become Greece. Thats when we become a country thats unsalvageable. And were gonna be there very soon. Were gonna be there very soon.


I will immediately terminate President Obamas illegal executive order on immigration, immediately.






Fully support and back up the Second Amendment.






Now, its very interesting. Today I heard it. Through stupidity, in a very, very hard core prison, interestingly named Clinton, two vicious murderers, two vicious people escaped, and nobody knows where they are. And a woman was on television this morning, and she said, "You know, Mr. Trump," and she was telling other people, and I actually called her, and she said, "You know, Mr. Trump, I always was against guns. I didnt want guns. And now since this happened"  its up in the prison area  "my husband and I are finally in agreement, because he wanted the guns. We now have a gun on every table. Were ready to start shooting."


I said, "Very interesting."


So protect the Second Amendment.






End  end Common Core. Common Core should  it is a disaster. Bush is totally in favor of Common Core. I dont see how he can possibly get the nomination. Hes weak on immigration. Hes in favor of Common Core. How the hell can you vote for this guy? You just cant do it. We have to end  education has to be local.


Rebuild the countrys infrastructure.


Nobody can do that like me. Believe me. It will be done on time, on budget, way below cost, way below what anyone ever thought.


I look at the roads being built all over the country, and I say I can build those things for one-third. What they do is unbelievable, how bad.


You know, were building on Pennsylvania Avenue, the Old Post Office, were converting it into one of the worlds great hotels. Its gonna be the best hotel in Washington, D.C. We got it from the General Services Administration in Washington. The Obama administration. We got it. It was the most highly sought after  or one of them, but I think the most highly sought after project in the history of General Services. We got it. People were shocked, Trump got it.


Well, I got it for two reasons. Number one, were really good. Number two, we had a really good plan. And Ill add in the third, we had a great financial statement. Because the General Services, who are terrific people, by the way, and talented people, they wanted to do a great job. And they wanted to make sure it got built.


So we have to rebuild our infrastructure, our bridges, our roadways, our airports. You come into La Guardia Airport, its like were in a third world country. You look at the patches and the 40-year-old floor. They throw down asphalt, and they throw.


You look at these airports, we are like a third world country. And I come in from China and I come in from Qatar and I come in from different places, and they have the most incredible airports in the world. You come to back to this country and you have LAX, disaster. You have all of these disastrous airports. We have to rebuild our infrastructure.


Save Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security without cuts. Have to do it.






Get rid of the fraud. Get rid of the waste and abuse, but save it. People have been paying it for years. And now many of these candidates want to cut it. You save it by making the United States, by making us rich again, by taking back all of the money thats being lost.


Renegotiate our foreign trade deals.


Reduce our $18 trillion in debt, because, believe me, were in a bubble. We have artificially low interest rates. We have a stock market that, frankly, has been good to me, but I still hate to see whats happening. We have a stock market that is so bloated.


Be careful of a bubble because what youve seen in the past might be small potatoes compared to what happens. So be very, very careful.


And strengthen our military and take care of our vets. So, so important.


SPEECH 7




Chris, thank you very much. I appreciate it.
This has been an amazing evening. Already, weve won five major states and it looks like we could win six or seven or eight or nine.


Its really been  its really been great.
I want to congratulation Ted on the winning of Texas. He worked hard on he  I know how hard he worked actually, and so I congratulate Ted Cruz on that win. That was an excellent win.
Were going to make America great again, folks. Were going to make it great again.
And, you know, I watched Hillarys speech and shes talking about wages have been poor and everythings poor and everythings doing badly, but were going to make it  shes been there for so long. I mean, if she hasnt straightened it out by now, shes not going to straighten it out in the next four years. Its just going to become worse and worse. She wants to make America whole again and Im trying to figure out what is that all about. Make America great again is going to be much better than making America whole again.
So I just want to say that this was an exciting evening. Its so great to be in Florida. Its so great to be at Mar-A-Lago with friends and the press and the media and everybody.


I know it was a very tough night for Marco Rubio. He had a tough night but he worked hard. He spent a lot of money. He is a lightweight, as Ive said many times before. But you know what? Were going to go to Florida, were going to spend so much time in Florida. Weve got about a 20-point lead. I know that a lot of groups, a lot of the special interests and a lot of the lobbyists and the people that want to have their little senator do exactly as they want, theyre going to put $20 million or $25 million into it over the next two weeks, from what just came over the wires. And frankly, I think thats fine. As far as Im concerned, its fine. And if he wins, theyll have totally controlled  total control. But hes not going anywhere anyway, but well see what happens. But were going to spend a lot of time in Florida.
The Virginia one was just a great win because its a place that is just spectacular and a place that we have big investments in, as we have in Florida. Remember, we have thousands of employees in Florida, all along Miami, Doral and Mar-A-Lago and so many other places. And its been an amazing place to invest. Its been amazing to have so many wonderful employees, so many of whom are here tonight, really urging us on.
And you know, I have thousands of employees all over the country, actually, all over the world but for purposes of tonight, well just say all over the country. And its been just so beautiful to watch this company grow and to watch it grow so strongly.
Recent articles came out talking about how great a company we built, and now we want to put that same ability into doing something for our nation. I mean, our nation is in serious trouble. Were being chilled on trade, absolutely destroyed. China is just taking advantage of us. I have nothing against China. I have great respect for China, but their leaders are too smart for our leaders. Our leaders dont have a clue and the trade deficits at $400 billion and $500 are too much. No country can sustain that kind of trade deficit. It wont be that way for long. We have the greatest business leaders in the world on my team already and, believe me, were going to redo those trade deals and its going to be a thing of beauty.
You look at countries like Mexico, where theyre killing us on the border, absolutely destroying us on the border. Theyre destroying us in terms of economic development. Companies like Carrier Air Conditioner just moving into Mexico. Ford, moving into Mexico. Nabisco, closing up shop in Chicago and moving into Mexico. We have to stop it, folks. I know how to stop it. Were going to create jobs. Were going to create jobs like youve never seen.
Were going to lower taxes. I have a plan that Larry Kudlow and so many others think is the best plan theyve seen. Were going to lower taxes substantially for the middle class. The middle class has been forgotten in our country. It really helped and really probably was the predominant factor in making our country into a country that we all love so much and were all so proud of, but weve forgotten the middle class. So were going to lower taxes.
Were lowering taxes on business. You look at all the companies that are moving out. When you see Pfizer moving to Ireland and you see so many other companies, constantly now theyre leaving. They used to move from New York to Florida, or theyd move from New Jersey to someplace else, Chris. But now theyre moving from here    not that many people are leaving New Jersey. But Chris understands the problem, fully understands. Now theyre leaving from places that they used to move to into other parts of the world. We cant let that happen.
Weve lost our manufacturing jobs. Weve lost our manufacturing. Millions and millions of jobs, thousands and thousands and thousands of plants, manufacturing plants, warehouses. I mean, we are losing so much. We cant let it happen.
I tell the story often about a friend of mine who is in the excavation business and he always orders Caterpillar. And recently, he ordered Komatsu tractors from Japan because theyve cut the yen. Theyve devalued the yen to such an extent that it was virtually impossible for Caterpillar to compete. And I dont want that to happen. Thats not going to happen. They shouldnt be allowed to do it.
We have tremendous power over everybody because we are really the source. We have great, great power. The problem is we have politicians who truly, truly, truly dont know what theyre doing. So were going to work very, very hard.
Im so honored by this evening. If you wouldve told me on June 16th, when I was with my wife, Melania, and we came down the escalator in Trump Tower and it looked, literally, well, a little bit like this. You have a lot of cameras here tonight.


It looked, literally, like the Academy Awards. I never saw so many cameras in my life. And it takes courage to run. Ill tell you what, it takes a lot of courage to run for president. Ive never done this before. Ive been a job-producer. Ive done a lot of things but this is something Ive never done, but I felt we had to do it. When you look at the incompetence of the Iran deal, where we give $150 billion, we get absolutely nothing. When you look at all of the problems our country has and you look at our military, which is really being depleted rapidly, depleted. Were going to make our military bigger and better and stronger than ever before, and nobody, nobody, nobody is going to mess with us, folks, nobody.


So its just an amazing honor to have you with me tonight. And if you want, press, I think we told you before wed be okay if you want to ask a few questions.
Yes, go ahead.


Well, they can always do that and then theyll  then theyll just lose everything and that would be the  that would be the work of a loser.
But let me just explain something. If youve seen whats happened, whether you go to South Carolina, where I had a huge victory, where we had a tremendous victory in New Hampshire, tremendous in Nevada, you look at whats happened, and tonight, of course, is the best of all. I mean, right now, theyre projected I guess six, but we could be seven, eight, nine, and major states. Its Georgia, Alabama, Massachusetts  (CHEERS)  Tennessee, Virginia. And you know, these are amazing states and were going to probably get a lot more. In fact, were projected to have some pretty good additional numbers.
But I will say this. Look, we have expanded the Republican Party. When you look at whats happened in South Carolina and you see the kind of numbers that we got, in terms of extra people coming in. They came from the Democratic Party, or the Democrat Party, and theyre Democrats and theyre long-time Democrats and they were never going to switch and they all switched. And they were independents. And weve actually expanded the party. Look at the number of votes we had in that area, as an example. Four years ago, they had 390,000 or so votes. We doubled it. We were almost 800,000. Whereas the Democrats went down. Theres much less enthusiasm for the Democrats.
So I  look, Im a unifier. I know people are going to find that a little bit hard to believe, but believe me, I am a unifier. Once we get all of this finished, Im going to go after one person, thats Hillary Clinton, on the assumption shes allowed to run, which is a big assumption. I dont know that shes going to be allowed to run. And I think thats, frankly, going to be an easy race. You see the polls. I beat Hillary in many polls. I know one thing. I dont think Marco is going to be able to beat her. I dont think  in all fairness, I think Teds going to have a very hard time. But Ted at least has a shot because at least hes won a little bit.
So I just tell you this. We are going to be a much finer party, a much  were going to be a unified party, I mean, to be honest with you. And we are going to be a much bigger party, and you can see that happening. Were going to be a much bigger party. Our party is expanding. And all you have to do it take a look at the primary states where Ive won and just look  weve gone from X number to a much larger number. That hasnt happened to the Republican Party in many, many decades. So I think were going to be more inclusive. I think were going to be more unified and I think were going to be a much bigger party, and I think were going to win in November. OK, yeah?


Im just doing whats right. Look, Planned Parenthood has done very good work for some  for many, many  for millions of women. And Ill say it and I know a lot of the so-called conservatives, they say thats really  because Im a conservative, but Im a common-sense conservative. But millions of women have been helped by Planned Parenthood. But were not going to allow and were not going to fund as long as you have the abortion going on at Planned Parenthood, and we understand that and Ive said it loud and clear. But  and well see what happens. But Planned Parenthood  millions of people  and Ive had thousands of letters from women that have been helped. And this wasnt a setup. This was people writing letters. Im going to be really good for women. Im going to be good for womens health issues. Its very important to me, very important to me.
 And maybe thats not a perfect conservative view, but I can tell you one thing. Im more conservative than anybody on the military, on taking care of our vets, on the border, on the wall, on getting rid of Obamacare and coming up with something much, much better, and certainly, getting rid of common core and bringing education to a local level so that youre going to have good education for our children who are being absolutely starved for proper education.
So Sarah, I mean, you know, you can call it what you want, but I am a truth-teller and I will tell the truth, OK?
Yeah, go ahead, finish it.


I feel awfully good. I mean, Im watching your people  Im watching your people on  and Im going to be very nice, Im going to be very nice  Im watching your people on CNN and Im watching the Fox people and Im watching the MSNBC people, too, OK? See? Im becoming diplomatic.  And they are certainly being very nice to me tonight. I mean, you know, theyre being very strong. And they are, theyre declaring Marco Rubio the big loser of the night, which is true. He didnt win anything. He hasnt won anything, period.
And by the way, and I have to tell you  and he was very, very nasty. Ive never heard a person get up and speak on an evening like this and be so nasty, but hes got a right to be nasty. He hasnt won anything and hes not going to win very much.
But I do congratulate Ted because I know how hard Ted worked on Texas and its a big get. Now I also did very well in Texas. I came in second. And one of the things my son, Eric, told me, which I didnt even realize, is that not only did I win most of the states  and some are coming in and Im expected to win them  but I came in second  I came in no worse than second. So it wasnt like I won and then I disappeared. The worst I had was a second. So Im very, very honored by the turnout, OK?
Yes, go ahead.


Right. Oh, theyre totally wrong. Look, I disavowed. I disavowed when I  in fact, Chris is my number one  Chris gave me the honor of joining the campaign. He called me. He said, "Donald, what youve got is a movement." We spoke today in Kentucky. Youve never seen a crowd like that. That had to be 20,000 people inside this massive convention center and it was incredible. And every place were speaking, if we have 10,000 people its like a small group. We had 35,000 people the other day in Alabama. And when Chris called, he said this is a movement; this is something like Ive never seen. And in all fairness to the press, a lot of the press have said the same thing. Theyve never seen whats happening right now. Theyve never seen anything like it. And Im just honored by it.
Now, when Chris joined, we had a news conference and they asked me the exact same question. I said I disavow. Now, right after the program that were talking about  and I thought it was clear, but you know, were talking about groups, groups, groups. I do have to know the name of the group because, who knows? I mean, they have to give me the name of the group. But right after, when I reviewed it, I put out a tweet and I put out on Facebook that I totally disavow. Now everybody knew I did that but the press refused to look at that. It was right after. And I disavowed then; I disavowed today on ABC with George Stephanopoulos, I disavowed again. I mean, how many times are you supposed to disavow? But I disavow and hopefully its the final time I have to do it. But if you look at Facebook and if you look at Twitter, right after the show I put out a statement because I want everybody to be sure.
Yes, go ahead.


No, its not, but there is always going to be some negotiation, and its going to be a good negotiation, not a bad negotiation. Its going to be a negotiation where well start at certain levels and hopefully I will make a great deal, and lots of great deals, for the American people.
So you know, look, you cant go around just signing our little notices that the president signs all the time, executive orders, hes done executive order, executive order. Its almost like, I dont even know. Does he ever go a deal with Congress anymore? Does he ever speak to the Senate? Does he ever speak with congressmen and get them into a room and get things done?
You know, a good example of this, in all fairness, is something that I  is very, very important to me; corporate inversion. Carl Icahn, whos a friend of mine who endorsed me, great businessman, he  it bothers him so much he calls me about it all the time, where were losing companies. And were losing for two reasons. Were losing for a lot of reasons but the taxes are too high. We have the highest  were the highest taxed nation in the world.
And very importantly, they have trillions, for companies, trillions of dollars outside of this country. The Democrats agree it should be brought back in. The Republicans agree it should be brought back in. Everybody agrees it should be brought back in. I could sit in a room  or the Oval Office  for a period of, literally, a half hour and I really believe I could get everybody  every single  you know, its one thing they dont agree on health care or they dont agree on common core or they dont agree on other things and theyll fight. Heres something every single  I mean, almost everybody agrees. These trillions and trillions of dollars should be brought into the country.
The president cant make a deal. The reason is he doesnt know how to make a deal, probably doesnt work at it, probably doesnt care, but youre talking about tremendous number of  tremendous amounts of money. So when you have something that everybody wants and you cant make a deal, theres something going on thats really wrong. And what it means is you have the wrong leader.
Yes?


Well, look, everything  we are going to have a wall. I can tell you we are going to have a wall. I watched the ex-president of Mexico, the arrogance of this man. And I get along great with Hispanics. You saw in Nevada, I won in the poll, the Hispanic vote. I have thousands of people that work for me right now that are Hispanic. Ive had thousands and thousands over my lifetime. These are great people. The Mexican leaders are too smart for our leaders and you saw it. Vincente Fox, first of all, he used a word that you should never have  if I ever used that word you folks wouldve never, ever, ever let me get away with it. Nobody even talked about the word he used and this is the ultimate word. But he was angry at the concept of somebody saying that they were going to pay for the wall. Mexico is going to pay for the wall. We have a trade deficit with Mexico of $58 billion a year  $58 billion. The wall is going to cost $10 billion. Its so easy. Ive had these guys that Im on the stage with go you dont really mean Mexico is going to pay for the wall. One  as sure as youre standing there, 100 percent, Mexicos going to pay, 100 percent.


And the reason is Im a businessman. I know how to do this. Politicians are all talk, no action. Its not going to  except for Chris Christie, of course.  Its not  look, its not going to happen. Its not going to happen with these people.
So when you think of it  and then they say youll never be able to build a wall. Well, its 2,000 miles but we really need 1,000 miles. The Great Wall of China, built 2,000 years ago, is 13,000 miles, folks, and they didnt have Caterpillar tractors, because I only want to use Caterpillar, if you want to know the truth, or John Deere. I buy a lot of equipment from John Deere. I love John Deere, too. But they didnt have tractors. They didnt have cranes. They didnt have excavation equipment. The wall is 13,000 miles long. We need 1,000 miles and we have all of the materials. We can do that so beautifully. And this is going to be a serious wall. This is going to be high wall. This is going to be a very serious wall.
Were going to stop drugs from coming into New Hampshire. You know, when I won New Hampshire, those people were so incredible to me. And when you go, you wouldnt believe it because its so bucolic, so beautiful. You look at the fields and you look at everything, its so beautiful. And yet, you go to a meeting in New Hampshire, their number one problem, their number one problem is heroine. The heroine is pouring in and they have so many of their young people and other people addicted. And I told them Im going to stop it. Im going to stop it. Were going to have a strong border, and I mean strong.
And by the way, speaking of people, people are going to come in and theyre going to come into this country, but theyre going to come in legally, OK?


Ive got to find out whats going on. Weve got a big problem. We have a big, big problem. Ill tell it like it is. We have a big, big problem. Weve got to figure it out. Were going to figure it out. Radical Islamic terrorism, big, big problem, not only for us. You take a look at Germany, you take a look at Sweden, you take a look at Brussels. You look at some of these places, its like a disaster. And were not going to allow people to come into our country who we have no idea who they are, we have no idea where they come from, they have no paperwork, theyre young and theyre strong. You look at that migration line; theyre young, theyre strong, theyre powerful. And you say why arent they back fighting for their country?
Now, with all of that being said, I feel strongly  I have a bigger heart than anybody. Were going to build a safe zone. Its going to be in Syria. And Im going to get the Gulf states, who have more money than anybody  weve got to loosen up their wallets a little bit. Were going to get  but theyre not accepting people. Were going to get  wait, wait, wait. Were going to get the Gulf states to pay for it because they should.


Oh, were going to bring them back. Were going to bring them back. Look, Im telling you  you know how Im going to bring them back? First of all, were going to do great with the African- Americans, and you see that in the polls where I had in one poll where Im 25 percent. And one of the commentators, who I think is standing right at the back of the room in the corner, said, you know, if Donald Trump gets 25 percent of the African-American vote, this election is over. You watch. And the reason Im getting that  and Im going to do great with the Hispanics. Im going to do great with virtually every group. The reason is Im going to bring jobs back. Im going to get Apple to start making their computers and their iPhones on our land, not in China. How does it help us when they make it in China?


Well, look, I always liked Marco until about a week ago when he decided to go hostile. He decided to become Don Rickles, OK? But Don Rickles has a lot more talent. Honestly, I did, I always liked him but he became  you know, somebody told him youre losing very badly. The only way you can possibly win, take the hail Mary, they called it a hail Mary, the folks in the back, and go hostile. Its hurt him. In fact, one of the newscasts tonight said he went down 15 or 20 percent. Its really hurt him.
But look, Im not going to tell him what to do. Im not going to tell anybody what to do. You have to run. He had a bad night, according to CNN, Fox. I watched their broadcasts. They say the loser of the night was Marco Rubio and its true. He didnt win anything. He hasnt won. I mean, at least you can say that Ted has won something, and you know, Marco has not won. Youve got to be able to win. You cant talk. You know, these politicians, all talk, no action. Youve got to be able to win something. He hasnt won anything. And he actually hasnt come very close. So well see what happens.
Yes, go ahead.


Im going to be a good president for the world but we have a country thats in big trouble. Our infrastructure is going to hell, our roads, our highways, our schools, our hospitals, our airports. I go throughout the world. I mean, you go to Qatar, you go to  some people say Qatar, but you go to Qatar, you go to any of  so many places. You go to different places in China, different places in Asia, different places in the Middle East, you look at some of the airports they have. You look at the roadways they have. You look at the transportation systems they have and the trains they have. Were like a third world country.
So I am going to be very good for the world. Im going to get along with the world. Youre going to be very proud of me. Even you will be very proud of me as a president. But we have to rebuild our country. Our country is going to hell and people dont understand that.
And Hillary Clinton doesnt have a clue. She cant do that. Shes talking about  I mean, one of the things that has really bothered me, I think one of the reasons I have such great support, is that people, you take a look, people in the middle-income groups are making less money today  less money than they made 12 years ago. And in her speech, she just said theyre making less money. Well, shes been there with Obama for a long period of time. Why hasnt she done anything about it? Practically everything that she was complaining about  shes picked up what I say. The difference is shes been there for a long period of time. Why havent they done anything about it?
Then you look at her record as secretary of State. Its abysmal. You look at whats going on with Syria. You look at whats going on with everything. Its a disaster.
So were going to have an interesting period of time. I dont know that shes going to be allowed to run. What she did is a criminal act. If shes allowed to run I would be very, very surprised. But if shes allowed to run, honestly, itll be a sad day for this country because what she did was wrong. And what she did  (CHEERS)  let me just tell you, what she did was wrong and other people have done far less than her and they paid a very, very big price.
OK, one or two more questions. Yeah, go ahead, Jeremy


At this moment, absolutely not, no. We either have a country or we dont. We have a country, or we dont. We have borders or we dont have borders. And at this moment, the answer is absolutely not.


Well, look, I dont expect  I have a lot of respect for Reince and for the group and I like the RNC and I dont know that Ive been treated fairly or not. I really dont know. I cant tell you that. But I can tell you that I do respect them.
What I really have is a great number of people. I have millions and millions of people. And when I was watching this broadcast just a little while ago, before I came in here because I wanted to see exactly where we were before I started speaking, I was amazed at the kind of numbers. The Republicans have tremendous energy. The Democrats dont. They dont have any energy. Their numbers are down. Our number are through the roof. And people are making the statements theyve never seen, in modern times, a party that was so energized.
I think if somebody is doing as well as Im doing  and Im not just speaking for myself, whether it be me or anybody else  but if Im going to win five  Ive already won five, but maybe it could be six, seven, eight, nine. It could be nine, could win nine states tonight. If Im going to win all of these states with tremendous numbers, and if Im going to come in the worst is second in the two or three that I might not win, I think, you know, were a democracy. I think its awfully hard to say thats not the person we want to lead the party, right? You know, its very hard.
But I really think that  I think its a great question, David, because I really think that one of the biggest things that everybody is seeing happening, and everybody, is the Republican Party has become more dynamic. Its become more diverse. Were taking from the Democrats. Were taking from the independents. We have a lot more people. We have a lot more people. I mean, take a look at South Carolina. Look at the numbers. Look at the numbers from four years ago when nobody even wanted to waste their time and vote. And then you look at  I was there and you had lines that went a mile long. And it was virtually more than doubled.
So we have a very, very dynamic party and I think were going to be able to unify the party. I hope to be able to get along with everybody. I dont know Paul Ryan well but I hope to be able to get along with him. I do know Mitch McConnell a little bit but I hope to be able to get along with him. But remember this. I have millions and millions and millions of people. This isnt like its a close match. I mean, its only too bad that winner didnt take all, because if winner took all, this thing is over. Were just having a celebration.


You know, were having a celebration.
So anyway, I would like to  look, I just want to end by thanking everybody. This has been an amazing period in my life. My wife just called and Ivanka, as you know, is going to be having a baby very soon and shes a special person and its going to be great and we look forward to that. Shes back in New York. She wanted to be here. They all wanted to be here but theyre with Ivanka now and that could be, certainly, within the next week. But this this has been an amazing period of time. Its been amazing for me, even from an educational standpoint. And I think, honestly, weve done something that almost nobody thought could be done and Im very proud of it.
And I just want to leave you with this. I am a unifier. I would love to see the Republican Party and everybody get together and unify. And when we unify, theres nobody, nobody thats going to beat us.
Thank you very much everybody. Thank you.


Thank you very much. Thank you.


SPEECH 8


This is so  so incredible. 


 We  we have had, no matter where we go  you know, its a movement, folks. This is a movement.






No matter where we go, its amazing. We go to Dallas. We go to Oklahoma. We go all over. We went to, the other night, Iowa  packed. Every place  New Hampshire, packed. Every place we go to, its like this. Its amazing. And just great, great people.






And they actually had to tell over 3,000 people, "go home." Well come back. Well do another one. But they had to go home. Would you like to leave and well let them come in? No?


I dont think so, but we  they turned away a lot of people, which is too bad, actually. So maybe next time. I dont know. I think this is the largest room. I know its a record for the room.






You know, it has to be a record because every inch of the room is taken with people, and theyre standing. Theyre not sitting. So thats great. I love  we love setting records. We want the country to set records, right?






So, you know, I  I do this, and I love to do it. And I talk about our success because thats ultimately what its all about. I think were going to do fantastically well in Iowa. I really think were going to do great there. And I could say, "Oh, gee, if we came in the top four of five." Im not  Im looking to win everything. We want to run the table. We want to run it, because that sends a signal.


And, you know, weve been a little bit  we had to respond to Hillary. She came out with that  she came out  remember, she wrote  she said, "Hes got a  hes demonstrated a penchant"  I demonstrated  "a penchant for sexism." Can you believe it? Me? Nobody respects women more than Donald Trump. That I can tell you.






And, you know, when she said that, I had no choice, because I didnt start it. I had no choice. And I did have to mention her husbands situation. OK?


(Laughter)


And that is now the biggest story on television by a factor of 10. So, we have to do it. You cant let people push you around. You cant let people tell lies. You cant do it.


 You know, its interesting. One of the polls came out from CNBC and they said that if its Trump against Hillary in the election, it will be the greatest voter turnout in the history of this country. I can see that. I can see it.






And they said all of these people that are going to come in new, that never vote  they never vote, they dont care  theyre going to mostly  Ill tell you what, theyre going to vote for Trump. Thats why theyre coming in, because theyre so fed up with the system  this corrupt, horrible system. Theyre fed up with it and theyre fed up with those guys back there, the media.


TRUMP: They are the worst.






No, no, no. Theyre fed up. Theyre fed up with the media. I mean, Ive got  and you know, not all bad, but theres so much dishonesty in the media. And I like to call it out. And one of the things thats really been amazing to me, and such  its been so beautiful to watch  the level of genius in the public. They get it, you know? They really get it. They want to marginalize us, they want to do all of this and they want to make everybody look like, "Oh, gee."


The level of genius  they fully understand. They know theyre crooked, they know theyre dishonest and they really  otherwise, who gets worse publicity than me?


(Laughter)


And yet, I see a poll at 42 percent. And you know, youre talking about 15, 16 people, started with 17. How are you? Started with 17 people. And you know, Id be happy with 42 if we had three, OK? Not thrilled, Id like to be that  over that 50 mark, but I think were doing really well.


And you know, its interesting, but the debates  OK. So the debates  thank  I love you too, darling.


(Laughter)


I love you. I do. I love you. I love every  you know what? The rooms, no matter where, whether its stadiums or big ballrooms like this one, its amazing, and theres love in the room. And I told  the other night, I said and a friend of mine, very, very successful guy who I would love to have negotiating against China. Thats what we need, not these hacks that we have.






No, no. I have guys ...






Carl Icahn endorsed me. Great business man. We have  I have great, great business people that want to be involved. And were going to use  we have the best. We have the best in the world. We dont use them. We use political hacks, we use special interest people that really dont care about the country, they care about their deals.


This is going to change so fast. You know, last year, $500 billion trade deficit with China. Think about it. You know what $500 billion is? You do  you do $100 bills, you would fill the room to the ceiling, $500 billion deficit  trade deficit with China. What are we? Are we  yes, I guess the answer is certainly lets not blame us.


Our leaders are stupid and  and/or  you have to say and/or they have deals, because whats happened is all of this money is being given to them by special interests, by all of these people, including lobbyists, and these lobbyists make our leaders do  our leaders, can you believe our leaders? This is what  but they make the leaders of our country do things that they dont even want to do because theyve given them tens and tens and tens of millions of dollars.


I look at this guy Jeb Bush. He spent $59 million on his campaign and he is down in the grave. He is nowhere. No, no. Think of it. Its got to be much more than that. It was actually $59 million a while ago. Every time I turn on an add, I see an ad about Trump. I mean, its not that bad an ad either. Its like  you know.






If youre going to do an ad, do an ad. But hes a low-energy person. Lets face it. We dont need low-energy. We need lots of energy.






But he spent  think of it. Think of it. He spent $59 million. I spent nothing, right? Nothing.






Now, Im going to be spending. You probably saw Im going to spend  now, were going to start spending a lot of money because I dont want to take any chances. You know, its  I love getting up  and for the last couple of months, I have been leading from practically the time I announced, right? And for the last  and leading a lot. Im going to go over that because I go over (ph) polls. I love polls. I love polls.






Now, when they  if they turn negative, I dont like them.






And I promise, if they turn negative, Im not going to be talking about them. In fact, I get criticized all the time. Youre always talking about your polls. One of these guys just got two. Hes at two. Im at 42. And one of these guys whos at two said, "He always talks about his polls and I dont." I wouldnt either if I had two, I swear I wouldnt.






I wouldnt. I wouldnt do it at all. But you know, I love to tell the story where I have spent nothing and Bush has spent $59 million, but much higher than that. Thats just  you know, because I see since then  I mean, just  you cant turn on this television without these commercials. And Fox  every two minutes its a commercial on Trump.


You know what he did? Its false advertising. So I killed him in the debate. According to Reuters, according to everybody, Drudge, whos an amazing guy, by the way. If you dont know Drudge  Matt Drudge. Right? Hes a great guy. But Drudge, 46 percent. At 46 percent, you have 15 people. Now, if you noticed a couple have dropped out. A couple or more.


But 15, 16 people  46 percent. Time magazine, 49 percent. Think of it. Slate, 51 percent. U.S. News and World Report  69 percent said I won the debate. I wont the debate, right?






PBS, Public Broadcasting System  69 percent said Trump won.






No, you know, it is amazing. We have Washington Times at 62 percent. CBS, 59 percent. Fox, 62 percent  Fox Las Vegas, 62 percent. So, they all say  then they go back home, after the debate. I like to see how did I do? Did I look good? Looking good is very important, right? Sometimes, it is not as much like what you say, its how did you look?


Oh, I looked good, didnt sound too good, but that is OK. You wonder if that is a good trait. But I go home, and I watch, and the pundits will say  and they cant totally kill me, because we know it is happening, we know whats happening  well, Mr. Trump was OK tonight. He was  I won every single online poll, I won.


And then, heres Bush. So, Bush does an ad. And he takes me  and he was talking about, you know, something, and manage  and then I killed him. I mean, he  by the way, I met 69 percent, he is at 1 percent, he got. He came in last.






He takes the ad  and I shouldnt even talk about him. Hes down to two or three  I  but it bothers me when I see a guy spending, you know, $60 million on ads against me, a lot of it, right? I say, why is he doing this? Doesnt he have something better, he should go home.






Just relax. You know, honestly, he should go home and relax. He shouldnt be wasting his time. But it does. I say, why is this guy spending all this money? Now he is spending it actually against a couple of other guys, they were also very weak and somewhere  but here is my ad. So, he made a statement, and after that, his spin people said, oh, he was great. He took on Trump, he took on Trump. Im standing here, hes over here. Took on Trump, he made a statement that was written by his pollster. You know? So, he would remember (ph) it.


He said, "Mr. Trump, why dont you this?" I said, OK. Then I gave him an answer. I said, "Jeb, Im at 42, you are at 2. Right? It is a simple answer. You started off here, right next to me, and then you were there, then you were there, by the next time, you are going to be off the stage. Right?






No, no, its true. And then  and then  and that was it. And so I responded. So, he asked me a question, question was fine. You know, professionally written. So, he asked me a question, good. I give him an answer, I blow him away. Right. Everyone says Trump won the debate. Everybody. And hat is it. So, the ad is him asking the question and Im standing there like this, because I havent  in fact, you see in one of them, Im just about ready to open my mouth.


But he doesnt let me respond. That is almost false advertising, isnt it? You know? So, I mentioned it, Hillary is a disaster. I mean, Hillary.


Hillary is controlled by her money. So is Jeb. So is  by the way, Im the only one self-funding my campaign. Im self-funding.






You know, one of the things that makes me happy. I heard one of my commentators this morning, said, "you know, Ive been watching this stuff for 50 years and Ive never seen anything like what has happened with Trump. One of them actually said  one of them  Im special. Youre special. I like you. Im special.


Isnt that nice? Thats a very  every once in a while, somebody can say something that hits you. Where are you? Who said that? Wow. So nice. Thank you. That is a nice one. Thats like, you know, very once in a while, there is a statement that is either nice or brutal. I think low-energy was a brutal statement, right?


Low-energy can be applied to Hillary. I just dont like to use the same thing twice on one of my enemies. Right? Because I consider them enemies. We view this as war. Dont we view this as war? Its war.


Its war. And so, you dont like to use it. I hate to give it up. What?


 How are you going to help my little girl (ph), daughter?  Oh, we are going to help your daughter. We are going to help the country, thats called helping the daughter. We are going to help your country. So, here is the story. So, we are in a situation where we have incompetent leadership, where our trade deals are killing us, our military is not prepared. General Odierno when he left, just recently, he said that we are less prepared than at any time that he can remember. And I think he went back tot he beginning, but lets say second World War. OK? Thats enough.


And we should be very prepared now, because the world hates us. She has done a terrible job as secretary of State. Think of it. Putin comes out, he said, Donald Trump is brilliant, he is doing an amazing job, and he is leading the pack. OK, thats nice.


 And she and my opponents  oh, isnt it terrible that Putin said  wouldnt it be nice if we could get along with the world? Wouldnt it be? Seriously. No, no, wouldnt it be nice?






I mean, they want me to refute his statement. How dare you say Im brilliant? How dare  thats  whos going to do that? And by the way, if he said it about anyone of them, they would have been very happy.


But the point is, we have to get along. The world has blown up around Barack Obama.


Now, I dont know if you saw his recent release. They were talking about the Department of State, State Department, and they said very strongly, you know, the things that theyve done. Well, they couldnt find it because what have they done thats good? And they said bringing peace to Syria. Did you see that?


So instead of saying they made a mistake  call it a typo, they made a mistake  theyre trying to justify it. Well, we meant were working on it. Can you believe  bringing peace to Syria. The world is blowing up, the migration in Syria  they say one of their achievements for the year is bringing peace to Syria, and the whole worlds talking about it. Its  the level of stupidity is incredible. Im telling you. I used to use the word incompetent, now I just call them stupid.






I went to an Ivy League school, Im very highly educated. I know words, I had the best words. I have  but theres no better word than stupid.






Right? There is none. There is none.






Theres no  theres no  theres no word like that. So we are going to turn things around. But  and if we have Hillary  Ive got to tell you. I just saw where for the last week shes been hitting me really hard with the women card, OK? Really hard. And I had to say OK, thats enough, thats enough. And we did a strong number. Shes not going to win. Any by the way, I love the concept  I love, love, love having a woman president. Cant be her. Shes horrible. Shes horrible.




 And you know really dont  Ill tell you who does not like  yeah, well get Ivanka. Good. Lets do Ivanka.






But Ill tell you who doesnt like Hillary are women. Women dont like Hillary.






I see it all the time. And always so theatrical; Mr. Trump said this and that and this. And you just  I actually  I shouldnt do it. I just have to turn off the television so many times. She just gives me a headache.






But you know  although I think last night I gave her a big headache.






I can imagine  I can imagine those discussions. But you have to hit back hard, and you cant let them push you around. And today, she gave a speech and she never even mentioned my name. You know, in the debate I was mentioned nine times, I mean everything. All of them. But her. I was mentioned nine times, none of the other candidates were mentioned. And then she came out with the sexism, which is so nonsense. And  but shes playing that card. And then I had to hit her back, so I hit her back and I talked about her husband and the abuse of women and the tremendous abuse  no, its tremendous abuse.


I mean, you look at it, its tremendous abuse. And I talked about that. And now today, the television is going crazy, and she gets up, makes a speech and doesnt even mention anything about me with sexism or anything else. I wonder why  I wonder why.






And remember this; its really important. A poll just came out where were tied, another one came out a couple of weeks ago, Fox, where Im leading by four or five points against her individually. Were doing great. I havent even focused on her yet.


Look at the people Ive focused on. I dont want to really knock them, I dont want to mention their names. But, you know, of those people that are all gone, they were all people that attacked me. Wouldnt it be nice if our country could have that same thing? You attack and theyre, boom, gone. And if we could do it verbally 






 you know, if we could do it verbally thats even better, right? You know, who wants to use our military? By the way, we are going to build the strongest, the best, the most powerful military ever. Ever. Ever.






And were going to take care of our vets, were going to take care of our vets 






 And it will cost you much less money, and it will be great. I mean, you are signing in programs, things that you will never, ever use, You know that. And you are paying for it. And you will never ever use them. So we will get that straightened out. We are going to straighten a lot of things. We are going to straighten out Common Core. Common Core is dead. Its going to be dead.






 When I look at parents and I see local parents in Iowa and New Hampshire and South Carolina, I went to a school and I saw the parents, they love their children. They want that  they want education. They love  they dont care about money, they dont care about anything. They love their children and its local.


And they get together and they do wonderful programs. They are smart people as opposed to getting it done by bureaucrats that are getting big, fat checks in Washington. I mean, we have such talent in this country and we dont use it. So, Obamacare, dead. Common core, gone. We are going to get rid of it. Department of Education, we are going to get rid of it.






 We are bringing education to a local level. One thing on education. So, in the world, we are ranked number 28. There are third world countries that are ranked better than us in education and many other things. And yet, per pupil, we are number 1, by far  there is nobody close. Number two isnt even close.


So we spend more money for pupil than any country in the world and we are ranked number 28 which is way down at the bottom, essentially. I mean, its  can you imagine we are ranked number 28 and we are number 1? And thats what I do like saying about my campaign, I spent less money than anybody else and I have the best results.


Im number one by a lot and I spent no money. I mean, my plane cost me some money, but I spent no ads. Took a little radio ad in Iowa. But I didnt do that  I took  I think the station is so lovely if you want to know the truth. But I spent essentially no money.


And then you have all these other guys spending vast  and they like the way the United States is run. Now, why would we put a guy like Jeb, like some of the others. Its not only Jeb Bush. They spend money. I see Rubio on the ads all day long.


You know, the black background. Hes got like a black thing. He should have put something like that behind him, right? Right there, the flag.






 No, no. And I like him. I think he is a nice guy. But I see these ads with the backdrop and it is just somber. Its not  I dont think its good. So, think of it. I spent no money and Im number one. Others spent  they will have spent hundreds of millions of dollars and they are not even in the race. Thats what we need for our country. What? OK. Ive got 15,000, I dont know what the hell he means by that but thats OK. So, but I think hes a fan. I dont think hes a  are you a protester? No. OK. No body likes Trump. OK. Hes not a protester. I love you.






 You know, the only time  dont worry about it. The only time the cameras focus on the crowd is when we have a protester. Cause I always have  like, look at this room, packed. I always have the biggest crowds.


And I go home and my wife said were there many people? I watched you on television tonight. I said, I had 20,000 people. She said, they didnt show it. They have it right on your face. So I have 20,000 people. I have 20,000 in Oklahoma, 35,000 in Mobile, Alabama. Nobody knows. Because those cameras stay right in your face and I think they cant move.


You know, I think they might be fixed because modern cameras maybe  except every time there is a guy that stands up protesting, you know, they are on drugs or something, cause some of those guys, its like. They dont even know what the hell they are doing there, all the sudden, the cameras swerve and make perfect shots.


And I like it because then it shows how big the crowds are. So, you know. Some time I think Im going to put in some false protesters. Ill put in some friendly protesters. Its the only way Im going to be able to get the crowd in.


So when we started, I talked about trade. I talked about the border. I talked about a lot of things. And I started on June 16th and  in Trump Tower, the famous escalator ride. And it takes guts to run for president. Ill tell you, you know, its like, Ive never did this before.


And, you know, then they tell you on a debate we had the largest debate. We have the largest audience in the history of cable television. Then CNN a couple of weeks later had 23 million. Fox had 24 million. CNN had 23 million  the largest audience in the history of CNN.


Now, theyre there  the cameras are on live right now. I mean, you know. So, the largest audience in the history of (inaudible).


Now, the debates used to be, if you go back four years or eight years, you know, whenever the cycles came up, nobody even wanted  they didnt want the debates. I think they were forced to take them for licensing. Nobody wanted the debates. They drew nothing, but now theyre drawing 24 million. Now they want to have more debates  "Oh, can we have more? Can we have more?" Can they go three hours?


Do you remember when they had the one go three hours? I said, no, Im not doing three hours. Its too long. Who wants  I could stand up here for 50 hours, but who the hell wants to sit home watching three hours of the stuff, right?


"Mr. Trump, you have 30 seconds. What would you do about ISIS?" Oh, great. And by the way, that question  I hate those questions. You know why? Because I want to be unpredictable. I dont want to tell ISIS what Im going to do to knock the hell out of them.






Remember, I said very strongly  (inaudible) the oil for what, four years? Youve been watching. I mean, four years. Ive been "get the oil, get the oil, get the oil." Because whos going to get the oil? Iran is taking over Iraq. We made a deal for Iran, done by some of the dumbest people on earth, on our side. We gave them everything. They  we dont even get our prisoners back.


And now Iran wants to start negotiating separately for them. Can you believe it? I go crazy. We would have gotten them back. All you had to do was say, "We want our prisoners back." They would have said no. I would have said, "I want them back; you dont understand me. I want them back." They would have said, "No, we wont do that." I would have said, "Bye-bye," and I would have left. Then I would have doubled up the sanctions. And I guarantee you...






... I guarantee you that within 24 hours, they would have called back and theyll say, "Youve got your prisoners; can we talk?"


And I would have never given them $150 billion. I would have never given them the money. I would have never give  theyre using it  they dont have to make nuclear. They can buy it. Why are they going to make it? Then we have the nuclear, where they have self- inspections. How about the area  you know, the big area? They dont want us there. Oh, I wonder why. They dont want us there. So they self-inspect, OK?


Then they have the 24-day inspection, but the self-inspection is the beauty. "We think youre making nuclear weapons here." "Well, let us go check, Mr. President, well check."






"No, sir, were not making nuclear weapons. Nobody  no, were not; we would never do a thing like that."


These are people that have deceived us. Theyve lied to us. Theyre a terrorist state. But  and I used to say its the worst deal that Ive ever seen negotiated. And by the way, just to finish prisoners. So theyd come back; we get our prisoners. But then when I hear the other day that now this deal is done. Its all done. And now I hear they want to negotiate to get  and what do they say? They said very strongly, they said, "We are going to want a lot for the prisoners. Thats out  were starting off; were going to want a lot."


Now, weve already taken off the sanctions. Theyre already rich as hell. What  whats going on there? Thats why I say, I mean, some people say its worst than stupidity. Theres something going on that we dont know about. I mean, honest. And you almost think  Im not saying that, and Im not a conspiracy person. As you said, "We are; were saying it."






Half the people in this room are saying it. Im trying to be  you know, Im just hoping theyre just stupid people, OK?






Which they are. Or theres something going on. Because its  its inconceivable. You know, do you ever see where some things are so bad that it cant be  that nobody can do what they did, right? Nobody.


So, Iran now wants to negotiate separately for the (inaudible). In other words, that deal is done; now we want to start all over again. And they want a lot. "We want a lot." And I just  I want to just shoot the television, you know? Because they would have had it just by saying.


And, you know, when they asked Kerry and Obama, the deal was made. Everybody knows its a horrible deal. Its going to need to  its going to lead to tremendous nuclear proliferation, and theyre so rich now. You know, they became  $150 billion  they became so rich. And many other things that you dont even know about. Most people dont even know what the agreement says.


 But Ill tell you what, when you look at what were doing, were not going to have  if we keep going like this, folks, were not going to have a country left. Were not going to have a country. Were not going to have a country.


And were like a dumping ground for the world. Were a dumping ground. They want to take these migrants  the migrants, you know, and I feel terrible about the migration, caused by Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama. Theyre the ones that caused it. They go into Libya. They knocked the hell out of Gadhafi. OK, so Gadhafi  they backed rebels who end up killing the ambassador and the other young people.


You know the ambassador was riding in a jeep, one of our jeeps, of course, a military jeep, holding the Libyan flag and you know, freedom, freedom, freedom. And then gets killed by the same people. So, we backed people that turned out to be far worse than Gadhafi.


Look at what we did in Iraq. Look at what we did in Iraq. I mean, what the hell did we get? We spent $2 trillion, and that was as a year and a half ago. I keep saying two or three, its a lot more than that. We spent $2 trillion, we have thousands of deaths, and Im not even talking other side.


You are talking about hundreds of thousands, maybe millions. You have thousands of deaths. We have wounded warriors, who I love, all of. These guys are the toughest  these are the greatest people.






 You know, these are the greatest people. And then what happens? We leave, and we have a president that announces the date of when we are leaving. So, I said, man, if Im the enemy, Im just going to go wait for 18 months right?


He gave a date. We are leaving Iraq, we will be gone by such and such a time. I said, Im just sitting there watching and Im saying, man, thats really stupid. Because, believe me, the enemy doesnt want to be killed. You know, you hear so much, oh they want to go with the virgins up to wherever they go, right?


They dont. They want to live. And they want to take care of their families, always their families. You remember that, because their families know whats going on OK? You think their wives dont know what they are planning? You think their kids dont know exactly what daddy is doing when daddy is going to fly into the World Trade Center? You think they dont know? They know exactly whats going on. Remember that. And frankly, I think they have more love for their familys lives than they do for their own lives, OK. But they still want to live. So here is Obama, gives an exact date. He gives an exact date and so they pull back.


And everyone says, oh, we are doing so well. Look, were doing so well. Why should they fight when they know, in 18 months, they can go in and take the place? So what happens? So we have ISIS taking a lot of oil. I said take the oil. Remember when we left, I was opposed to going in because I said youre going to destabilize the Middle East.


Because you had Iraq and you had Iran. And I said, they fight, theyre always fighting for decades and decades, for generations. They fight, thats what they do. They fight. How we ever got involved in this mess is hard to believe. They fight and they were equal militarily. They go this way, 10 feet. They go this way, 10 feet. Then they rest a couple of years, then they start fighting again.


Then Saddam Hussein throws a little gas. Everyone goes crazy. Oh, its because (ph) of gas. They go back and forth. Its the same. And they were stabilized. And I said, if you go after one or the other, in this case Iraq, youre going to destabilize the Middle East. Thats what going to happen. Youre going to destabilize the Middle East. And thats exactly what happened. We totally destabilized the Middle East.


We have now migrations ,largely because of whats happened afterwards. You know Iraq was horrible. It was stupid to go in and we should have never gone in. But we shouldnt have gotten out the way we went out. And we shouldnt have given dates. I mean, I would have probably said we are going to stay forever. And they would have said, oh, man.


And then keep going, keep going and eventually they would get tired and say, this guy is crazy. I mean, hes never going to leave and youll make a deal. But when you announce you are leaving in 18 months or whatever the hell he said, they just pull back. And then as soon as we left, they come in OK?


So they have the oil. You know who the biggest benefactor of the oil is right? China. Always China. I love China. I love Mexico. Their leaders are too smart for us. We have no border. We will build a wall. Mexico will pay for the wall by the way.






 Were building a wall, we are going to have a border. And people are going to come into our country, but they are going to come in through a legal process. Theyre not coming in the way theyre coming in now, just walking in like nothing.


They are going to come in, but they are going to come through a legal process. So, with Iraq, so we give them the date and they take over. We didnt take the year. So for four years, I have been talking about it. Then because of Paris, all of sudden they start bombing the oil.


But I didnt want to just bomb the oil. I wanted to take oil. Theyre bombing. You know, we are bombing. Great. Whats going to happen after that? So were bombing. And, you know, we are not really bombing it, because they are still selling it.


 I said, how could they keep selling it? Obama does not want to hit them too hard because he is afraid he is going to pollute the atmosphere. No, this is serious. Now think of it. He talks about the carbon footprint and yet he will fly a very old Air Force one, an old Boeing 747, with the old engines and you know, spewing stuff.


So, hes got a problem with the carbon footprint. You cant use hair spray because hair spray is going to affect the ozone. Im trying to figure out. Lets see, Im in my room in New York City and I want to put a little spray so that I can 










 right? Right? But I hear where they dont want me to use hair spray, they want me to use the pump because the other one which I really like better than going bing, bing, bing 






 and then it comes out in big globs, right, and you  its stuck in your hair and you say oh my God, Ive got to take a shower again. My hairs all screwed up, right?






I want to use hair spray. They say dont use hair spray, its bad for the ozone. So Im sitting in this concealed apartment, this concealed unit  you know, I really do live in a very nice apartment, right?






But its sealed, its beautiful. I dont think anything gets out. And Im not supposed to be using hair spray. But think of it. So Obamas always talking about the global warming, that global warming is our biggest and most dangerous problem, OK? No, no, think of it. I mean, even if youre a believer in global warming, ISIS is a big problem, Russias a problem, Chinas a problem. Weve got a lot of problems. By the way, the maniac in North Korea is a problem. He actually has nuclear weapons, right? Thats a problem.


Weve got a lot of problems. Weve got a lot of problems. Thats right, we dont win anymore. He said we want to win. We dont win anymore. Were going to win a lot  if I get elected, were going to win a lot.






Were going to win so much  were going to win a lot. Were going to win a lot. Were going to win so much youre all going to get sick and tired of winning. Youre going to say oh no, not again. Im only kidding. You never get tired of winning, right? Never.






But think of it. So Obamas talking about all of this with the global warming and the  a lot of its a hoax, its a hoax. I mean, its a money-making industry, OK? Its a hoax, a lot of it. And look, I want clean air and I want clean water. Thats my global  I want clean, clean crystal water and I want clean air. And we can do that, but we dont have to destroy our businesses, we dont have to destroy our 


And by the way, China isnt abiding by anything. Theyre buying all of our coal; we cant use coal anymore essentially. Theyre buying our coal and theyre using it. Now when you talk about the planet, its so big out there  were here, theyre there, its like theyre our next door neighbor, right, in terms of the universe. Miss Universe, by the way, I made a great deal when I sold  oh did I get rich.






That was a great deal. You know, they broke my choppers on that. They said he talks about illegal immigration, were not going to put him on television. First of all, Univision is being sued like crazy; you wouldnt believe it. And NBC, I made a great deal with them, just like an amazing deal, far more than I would have ever gotten  I mean, I made an unbelievable deal  far more than I ever would have gotten if I said I think Im going to sell it if times were normal, right? Isnt it amazing the way that stuff can work out?


But I love Miss Universe and I love the universe. But think of it. So China is spewing up all this stuff and were holding back. And with China  you know, we signed these agreements where we have to do it now, they have to do it within 30 or 35 years. I dont think theyre going to be doing it.


Its like Japan. If somebody attacks Japan, we have to immediately go and start World War III, OK? If we get attacked, Japan doesnt have to help us. Somehow, that doesnt sound so fair. Does that sound good?




 So South Korea  I order televisions, I order thousands of televisions a year. I order televisions because I have a lot of stuff and I like nice brand new  theyre all made in South Korea, most  other than Sony, and Sony, in all fairness, has lost its way. But a lot of them  Samsung, all of them. I mean, theyre all pretty much  all of them, right? I think just about. But I order thousands of televisions, theyre all from South Korea. So we have 28,000 people on the border separating South Korea from this maniac in North Korea, we get nothing. What do  we get nothing. Theyre making a fortune. Its an economic behemoth.


A lot of you dont know we protect Germany. Germany! Mercedes Benz, how many people have a Mercedes Benz? We protect Germany. Its an economic behemoth.


We protect Saudi Arabia. They were, during the good oil days  now its probably half, which is fine. But during the good old  they were making a billion  listen to this  a billion dollars a day, and we protect them. Our military  they pay us peanuts, like nothing. And then if we want to buy  we want to move to another location, well, thats very expensive if we do that. We want  they charge us rent?


I mean, look. We are run by people that are so bad, theyre so out of their league  and I see it, I see it on the stage. You know, theyre  a lot of them are nice people. You know, a lot of people think I dont like these people. I do like them. But they dont have business sense, they dont have business ability, they dont have common sense. Theyre politicians, theyre all talk, theyre no action.


When I say...






... folks, when I say, "Were going to build a wall." Most of them say, "You cant build a wall  build a wall." In China 2,000 years ago, they built the Great Wall of China, which is bigger than any wall were thinking about, OK? The Great Wall of China goes 18,000 miles. We have 2,000 miles of which we only need 1,000 miles, because you have a lot of natural barriers, right, that are extremely tough to get across. We have 1,000 miles.


So, China has 18,000 or 13,000 miles, and we have 1,000 miles. We have modern cranes. We have Caterpillar tractors  I want to use Caterpillar; I dont want to use Komatsu.






Made in America.






Even my hats, theyre made in America. It wasnt easy to find a guy that could do those hats. You know what Im talking about. I see so many knock-offs of my hat, right? "Make America Great Again." I see these things that are out of plastic. Theyre out of all sorts of crap. Mine are made in America. And honestly, they do a great job, but they dont produce as many as Id like because, frankly, theres a big  I mean, its amazing. Those hats are amazing. But I wanted to have it made. And you know why I wanted it  I wanted it, anyway, but I also knew that as soon as the hats came out, and other things  we have a website  as soon as the hats came out, I knew the press would be calling. And its true. First hour when the hats were announced, I get a call from the New York Times. "Mr. Trump, where are those hats made?" I said, "America."






I knew it. I knew it. Because as you know, if I would have said China, I would have been in big, big trouble. But theyre being knocked off all over the world. I mean, I see hats  theyre like helmets. I see them all. But what are you going to do?


But heres the story. Weve got to build a wall. So when I talk and when Im up on the stage with these guys, these people  wonderful people  and a very nice woman, Carly. Shes a nice woman. When Im up on the stage with them, they think Im crazy when I say "Mexico"  Im saying, "Were going to build a wall; its going to be a great wall; its going to be real wall. See this ceiling? This ceiling is peanuts compared to the height of the wall Im talking about."


Im talking about a van to get up there. Theyre not coming down because its too dangerous.






All right? Did you ever see what they do now? We have these little walls. They build ramps. They build a ramp. I say, "Wouldnt it be cheaper just to knock the wall down and just..." And then they drive over it with jeeps loaded up with drugs. Do you see this? They build ramps. There was a picture in Time magazine. Its a ramp  a little ramp that goes over the wall. So, they have a jeep  over, down, bump, make money. We get the drugs. Think of it. We  "build a wall" is right. Youve got to build a wall.


We get the drugs. They get the cash. No so good, right? We dont like that deal. Our politicians dont know  they dont know.


So when I say "Mexicos going to pay for it," these guys on the stage with me, theyre not business people. They dont understand. Mexico makes a fortune off the United States. Number one, we give them a lot of money. But in addition to that, theyre taking our businesses. Theyre making  you talk about a trade deficit. Ill tell you what, Mexico in a certain way is in a mini-version the new China. Mexico is making an absolute fortune  peanuts, compared to the cost of the wall.


Lets say the cost of the wall is $10 billion. Thats a good  I can do great job at $10 billion. I think well have a lot of money left over. Somebody else would  and by the way, 20 years ago, they wanted to build a wall. People that are opposed to it now, they wanted to stop and they wanted to build a wall. You know one of the reasons they didnt build the wall? Because of the Environmental Protection Agency, they couldnt get an environmental impact study approved. Can you believe it? Because there was a toad or a turtle or a snake or something was in the way.


Now, think of it. In China, in the South China Sea, there were these low-level land masses that were covered by water, but pretty close to the top. China sends in massive excavators and theyre (inaudible). Theyre building military fortresses in the South China Sea. And a friend of mine, who is one of the biggest and richest people in China  hes a great guy. Theyre great people. Theyre fine. Theyre just too smart. I mean, the leaders are too smart for our people.


They wont be too smart when I put my people there.






When they call up, "Wed like to speak to the donor that is negotiating it." "No, no. The donor now is Carl Icahn. Youre going to speak to Carl Icahn." You know Carl  great businessman. You have so many people  they call all these business people  call. So, a friend of mine, so I call him, I say, "Youre actually doing that." And then jokingly, I said, "How long did it take to get started? Did you have to get an environmental impact study approved in order to excavate?"


He looked at me, goes, "I  I hope youre kidding when you say that.


They conceived of the idea and they started digging four hours later, OK? There is no, you know, go through 25 years of environmental impact, you are going to hurt the snail. Youre going to hurt this. You are going to  they are doing a big thing.


They excavated  massive, massive  take a look, massive. The biggest excavation. They are ripping the hell out of that ocean. They are ripping it and they are taking their dirt and they are putting it  and theyre building air fields and theyre building forts.


We couldnt do it because, just like I said for the law. Legitimately, they could not get an environmental impact statement. Now, thats probably not the only reason it didnt happen. I heard their costs were too high. With me, thats easy.


You know, Im doing the old post office or watch (ph) you (ph). Im under budget, Im ahead of schedule. Hey, look at the campaign. The guys at $59 million and hes down at the bottom. Im nothing and Im at the top. Its the same thing.






 I actually said  its funny. The other day I got this great review. They said trump is a great speaker. The crowd is spellbound. But he has one problem. And Im reading, and I want to see. The problem is, he speaks through the Applause. In other words, like I say that, you applaud, I start talking you finish your Applause. And you know why? Because Im so excited, because we have so much potential. Its true.


 I dont want to wait for your freaking Applause. We have  I have so many  we have so much potential. There are so many things to do. I dont really sort of want to wait. I want to do it. And I just noticed, I did it again. You were getting ready to give a big Applause, because you like that, and Im speaking. I killed the Applause. But he is right. But except, Im not a speaker. What I am is a doer. I get things done.






 So, when the people up on the stage with me  and Hillary, Hillary doesnt have a clue. By the way, you talk about low energy. She has lower energy than Jeb Bush, which is hard to believe. She does. And Ill tell you and Ive been saying it. And maybe its rude, maybe it is not. But it doesnt matter. We have a much bigger problem. We have to save our country.


So, if Im rude and if people think Im rude  Im actually a nice person. I have a big heart. I want to help people. I want to help the migration. I want to do a safe zone in Syria. I dont want them coming here. We dont know who these people are. They are undocumented.






 And we should do a safe zone over there. We should have the Gulf states  Saudi Arabia and these states they are not spending. They have got to spend. They have to pay. You know, we are protecting them. Were doing  they wouldnt be there for two minutes if we werent protecting them. They have to start paying. They are not taking anybody, OK?


How about Germany taking millions of migrants. Can you believe what she is doing to that country? And she was the person of the year and I wasnt. Everybody said Trump was supposed to.


(BOOING)


Hey, what are you going to do. I think she has made a terrible mistake. We will find out. Time will tell. They have tremendous crime problems. I think she has made a tremendous mistake. But what I like is in Syria, with other peoples money, meaning the Gulf states and others and Germany and others.


Because, look, Germany is paying a fortune to accept all these people. Theyll give us the money. We do a massive safe zone. And then eventually when this whole catastrophe straightens out, which I will probably be able to get it straightened out, I understand this now.


But once its straightened out, they could go home to their country, you know, to their area. It is interesting, I have thousands of people that work for me. Thousands. And I have people that come from far  they are all here legally, dont worry about it. I use E- verify. But I have people  oh, they go and check. These guys go check.


They went into the old post office checking everybody who walked their dog, are you hear illegally? They said they found one person out of hundreds and hundreds. I dont believe it. But, you know, it is possible somebody slipped  hey, we do have 11 million people in the country. And it is probably a much higher number than that, OK? It is probably a much higher number.


But we have to do something about it and we are going to. So, I just want to finish by saying this. Look, we have a situation that is out of control. Our country is a dumping ground for the rest of the world. We are laughed at by the rest of the world.


And when I started this journey, and it is a journey, and I do love you people. Youre amazing people. And by the way, you are so smart. A lot of times, they will say, well Mr. Trumps people are blue-collar. I love blue-collar. Im honored by that.


But they are not blue-collar. We have blue-collar and we have executives and we have young people. They say the audience is old. Its not older. The audience is young. The other night in Iowa, I told that, and I said, we have so many young people and the place erupted. They are all young people. We have an amazing thing happening, its just...






 Look, thats their way of marginalizing, not even me, they are marginalizing you. It is disgusting. But when I started this journey and thats what it is, its a journey and its a movement thats taking place. Its a movement. Remember the old days? Silent majority? Its not right. Its a noisy majority. People are angry. Its a noisy majority. These arent silent people anymore. I go to people  you cant even hear.


This is an amazing thing thats happened. I received a call from one of the biggest reporters, who happens to be liberal, but thats OK. (inaudible) a couple of them, right? But, a guy whos really respected, recently, and he said, "How does it feel?" I said, "How does what feel?" He said, "What you have done has never been done in the history of politics in the United States." I mean, even CNN said, "Number one political story of the year is Trump." You know what number two was? ISIS  ISIS was two. Id rather reverse it. Let ISIS be one; let me be two, because I want to knock the hell out of them and make me number one next year.






Make me number one next year. But this reporter, who is a great intellect, actually, and a very smart guy, very good guy. He said  he said, "What youve done has never been done before in the history of this country." Newt Gingrich was on a television show the other say, and said, "This is one the great phenomenons (ph) Ive ever seen in politics; nobodys ever seen it."


Crowds like this? Forget it. I mean, its only confined to this (inaudible). Again, they sent 3,000 people home. Can you believe it? More than 3,000. Its  its unbelievable whats happening. Its beautiful whats happening. Its beautiful whats happening. But Newt Gingrich said hes never seen anything like this.


But he said to me, the reporter, he said, "never been done before." I said, "Well, you know, its fine, but if I dont win, its just a waste of time." He goes, "No, no, no. What youve done is incredible." He said, "Even if you dont win, what youve done is incredible; youve totally changed the landscape of politics."






No, dont applaud, dont applaud, dont applaud. He said, "Youve totally changed the landscape of politics; its forever going to be different. Your campaign  theres never been anything like it." OK, he was very nice. I said, "You dont understand. You dont understand. If I dont win, I will consider this"  and I mean this  "a total and complete waste of time." I really do.


So  because were not going to do anything. Its wonderful. Oh, good, I had nice crowds. Theyll write about me every once in a while; every two years Ill have a story, "Trump ran this rather good campaign." If we dont win, to me, and honestly you should feel the same thing, if we dont win, its a terrible waste of time, because youll have somebody else in there. They wont be able to do what I do. Theyre not going to be able to. And even if you get one of these Republicans in, like, I didnt finish the  so, the wall.


When I say "Mexico is going to pay," they all laugh. They all go "heh, heh, heh." They think its funny. Honestly, these are people  they think its funny. Theyre laughing. You know, lightly, like "Oh ho, thats so funny; ha, ha, ha." Theyre going to pay for the wall, folks. Theyre making billions and billions and billions of dollars on deficits that we have with Mexico. The wall is peanuts. Theyre going to pay for the wall.


But I mention it, now they dont laugh because theyre starting to agree with me. And then the other day, one of the people said  it was Ted Cruz, who is a nice guy. But he said, "Were going to build a wall at the southern border." I said, "Look"  and my wife is sitting (inaudible)  where did that come from, right? No, Teds a good guy.


But he said on one of  I think it was on Fox, he was being interviewed. And he said, "Were going to build a wall at the southern border." He didnt say Mexico was going to pay was going to pay. He hasnt gone that far yet, but believe me thats going to happen. See, theyre all trying to catch up with me. Because when I did this stuff, it was very out there.


Now, Im the one that everybody wants to sort of aspire to. But what happens is  so Teds up and hes talking. And, you know, routinely were going to have the border; were going to have this and that. And were going to build a wall.


My wife is sitting there. She says, "Darling, did you hear that? He just said theyre going to build a wall. Thats the first time Ive  you know, thats what you say." She hasnt heard that from any other candidate.


OK. So were going to build a wall. Mexico is going to pay for it. There are so many things were going to do. But when I  when I started the journey, it was amazing. I came down  it took courage. I went down in to the lobby of Trump Tower, on the escalator with Melania. I have never seen  it looked like the Academy Awards, the press. We have a lot of press here today. Theyre all live  look at all those live cameras.






So when I came down  when I came down on the escalator, we came down. And I said, "Were going to do things." And I mentioned illegal immigration. You wouldnt even be talking about illegal  it wasnt even on the radar. Nobody was talking about illegal immigration. Is that right? Now, its one of the big subjects.


 And thats why  and one of the beautiful polls that came out, and Im so proud of it, CNN just came out with a poll a couple of, I guess a week ago  36 percent for Trump; second is 16; third is 14; then 12. So theyre way down. But on the economy, they give me 55  55 percent. Thats with 16 people at the time.






On the budget, I mean, I understand  the budget, the economy, I win  I win it hands down, all right.


But listen to this. On illegal immigration, Im almost at 50 percent.






And on ISIS, likewise, almost at 50 percent. So people want to be protected, they want to feel safe. They need strength, they need toughness, they need smarts. I dont want to be tough  you know, I know a lot of tough guys but theyre not smart, and theyre the  theyre the easiest. You can be tough, youve got to be smart.


Lets start smart first. Youve got to be smart-tough. Youve got to be tough because the world is trying to take advantage of us. So what happens is this. I came out, I started  I did it, I was, oh, that first couple of weeks with illegal immigration and Mexico and all of this stuff. Then Kate was killed in San Francisco and Jamiel was killed in Los Angeles. Jamiel Shaw, an unbelievable young man, was killed, just shot right through the head by an illegal immigrant. Kate was shot by a guy who came in five or six times, shot in the back.


So many great people. And thats  these are two, so many. And then you have the economy and the jobs that are being lost and people arent paying taxes and all of this stuff, right? And all of a sudden, people are coming over, and I say the wall and now theyre starting to say the wall. We have to be progressive in our thinking. When I say progressive, I mean like smart. Im not talking progressive like a Bernie Sanders would say, the guy want to tax you. Think of it.






Think of it. This guy wants to raise your taxes to 90 percent. No, no, think  youll have to move out of this  I love this area, by the way. Ive been here many times. Great golfing area, right? We love it.






No more golf if Bernie Sanders  no more golf. No, no, you wont have any golf anymore. There wont be  you wont have any money left to be  youll be paying it in taxes. This guy is a total disaster.


And Im not saying that  Ill tell you why. You know, Hillary said well, Id like to run against Trump, believe me.


This poor Chuck Todd, Meet the Press. His show is dying and he keeps saying do it, do it, but I never liked it. You know, I just  he never treated me fairly. So I do his show, he gets the highest ratings hes had in years. He went from, like  believe me, I wont even give you the numbers, they were massive, the numbers, right? I saved his life, and then he goes Hillary Clinton said that she would most like to run against Donald Trump. And yes  and theyre looking forward to it. Trust me, the last person  shes already gotten a dose last night, do you agree?




 She had a tough night. She had a tough one. She had a tough night looking at the beauty pageant, OK?






So Hillary Clinton said  and heres Chuck Todd  and hes a nice guy. Im not trying to knock him. Please dont be insulted, Chuck. But she says she doesnt like him. But he doesnt treat me right. So he goes the Clinton campaign said theyd most like to run against Trump, like Im some kind of a sap. So I call him and I say Chuck, let me explain something. When they say they want to run against me, that means they dont want to run against me, do you understand that? Do you understand its reverse psychology.


They say they want to run against me  first of all, Im winning and tied in the polls now and I havent even hit her yet. But look at what happened to all the guys I hit. Theyre gonzo, theyre gone or theyre failing badly, OK, and theyll be gone soon.


But Hillary Clinton  think of it. I say so Chuck, report it like properly. Trust me, they dont want to run against Trump. The last thing she wants in her whole life is  this was only  I did this in, like, 15 minutes what happened to them, because the husband wants to come and she wants to accuse me of things and the husbands one of the great abusers of the world? Give me a break. Give me a break.






Give me a break. So the last person she wants to run against is me.


Now heres the story. Look, heres the story. Its very simple. So I announced  and I was talking about trade, I was talking about the wall, I was talking about the borders, I was talking about Obamacare, I was talking about the 2nd Amendment will be saved, by the way. The 2nd Amendment.






It will be saved. The 2nd Amendment is going to be with us if Im president. You know, theyre doing everything. They want to get rid of the bullets now, theyre doing everything they can 


Think of Paris, think of Los Angeles. Think if you had some guns in Paris on the good side, right? They had no guns. Paris has the toughest guns in the world, folks. And France  I mean, you get caught with a gun, its  the only one that has guns are the bad guys. So they go in these various places, they called the guy the mastermind. Hes a moron. I mean, this guy was a moron. I call him the guy with the dirty hat, right? They got him so good. By the way, the French police did a great job and our Los Angeles police did a phenomenal job. They did a great job.






Wouldnt it be wonderful if, lets see, this guy right here in front of me, hes a tough guy. This guy with the hat, with the lousy head of hair, but hes a strong-looking guy right here. This guy right there, see? And that one. Wouldnt it be nice if they had a gun on their waist? Somebody. Him, him, him, so that when they  you know what they were doing in Paris? Get over here, boom. Get over here, boom. Your turn, get over here, boom. One hundred and thirty people with more to follow because there are people that are so badly injured right now in hospitals. Other people are going to die.


Same thing over there. These are people that gave a party in honor of their marriage. Theres something going on, folks. Its wrong. They gave them a party. They worked  they gave them a party. She came in on a fiance permit or some nonsense and she was radicalized, and he was probably radicalized by her or he was already radicalized.


And people knew that they were radicalized and people in the area knew that they had bombs  who the hell doesnt know? Youre their next door neighbor. And they didnt want to talk about it. Youve got to report these people. Weve got a real problem. Youve got to report them. No more nonsense.


They didnt report them, and the reason they didnt is because they dont disagree with them so much. OK? Believe me. Its not because they were afraid. You saw the one who wasnt politically correct to (ph) report them. They didnt want to report them. I mean, give me a break. So we have to change.


So it started off with me where I was going to talk about trade, I was going to talk about all the things, I was going to talk about the military, building it up. I was going to do all of this, but after Paris and California, and there will be others because they have no fear of us, but after Paris and California, it has totally changed and my poll numbers went up 10 points.


Its amazing. They went up 10 points. I said, "What, you think it was the debate?" Because I did good in the debate. They said, "No. People view you as a tough cookie thats not going to take this crap." Thats what it is.






And now I talk about protection. I talk about  trust me. The trade  thats so easy for me. Ive got the greatest guys in the world. Theyre going to come in, theyre going to do a great job. Im going to do some myself. I always talk about Ford. Theyre going to built a plant, $2.5 billion in Mexico. Thats not going to happen with me. That stuff is  those deals are no good.


Fords leaving. Theyre closing plants all over Michigan to build a plant in  in Mexico. How the hell does that help us? OK. Who are the people that think this is a good thing for us? And in the meantime, in Michigan and other places, we have plants closing all over the place and theyre spending  think about a $2.5 billion  then theyre going to sell cars, trucks and parts into the United States, no tax, no nothing.


Ill say you dont have to pay a tax, folks. And you know what? Ford will say "If I (inaudible) pay a tax, were going to stay in the United States." I mean, its very simple.






Its very simple. How about two weeks ago, Nabisco announced a big  Chicago. They announced theyre going to leave Chicago with one of their big plants and theyre going to move it to Mexico. Whats my statement? Were not eating oreos anymore, right? No more.


But I dont want this. Its not going to happen. Then theyre make  theyre going to make product and theyre going to sell it into the United States? Not going to happen. Its not going to happen. And by the way, Im a free trader. I believe  weve got to be smart. I mean, weve got to get something. We dont get anything out of anything. We dont get anything.


We lose on everything. That Iran deal was a disaster. By the way, think of the Iran deal for one second. I always  and this came to me two weeks ago. I dont know why I didnt think of it sooner. Very disappointed with myself.






The Iran deal is the worst deal Ive ever seen negotiated, OK? Im wrong. You know what the worst deal is? Irans a part of that one too. We gave them Iraq. Thats even better. Think of it. We gave Iran Iraq. Iran has the biggest  think of it. Theyre going to have the richest oil  if you go to Iraq, take a look. Among the largest oil reserves in the world.


We gave them, by decapitating Iraq and then leaving, because frankly, once we did it we should have kept 20,00 troops or something, we give Iraq. So not only did they make a great deal in terms of the Iran deal that we know having to do with nuclear, we also gave them Iraq. We gave them Iraq, that theyve been after for 100 years. We handed it to them.


So now, they have the largest oil reserves among  in the world. Thats even better than the original deal. I mean, whoever is representing Iran is doing a hell of a job. OK? If that was a stock, youve got to buy some.


So we are not going to have deals like that with me. Its not going to happen. Were going to become rich again, we are going to become safe again and we are going to become strong again. And...






And youre going to remember this moment. This is going to be an important moment for all of us. The one thing I have to say and I have to ask you to do, go out and vote. Its going to be your turn.






Number three. Remember, it starts on February 1st with Iowa. We go to New Hampshire, then we go to the finals (ph), so three weeks. Weve got four weeks to go, and then we have three weeks after we start. No matter what is going on in your life, you have got to out and vote. Because if you dont, its not going to happen.


Dont sit back and say, oh, Trump is going to do well. The more we can win by, you know, the more power we have in a sense, because it is like a mandate. But you have got to go out and vote. And I will tell you this. It has been an honor to be here, I love this area, I love the people here. Its been an honor.






But we will make America great again, I promise. Thank you.


 (OFF-MIKE) Thank you very much, everybody. Well, I want to begin by thanking the people of South Carolina. This is a special state. Thank you. These are special people and we got a little boost last week from a place we all remember -- New Hampshire. We can't forget it. Special, special. We love it. And they sent us in here with a very good feeling, right?






 Very good feeling. So I really want to thank you and my volunteers. All of these people -- volunteers and they travel and they -- and I say, "what are you doing?" And now they're going to Texas and they're going all over. Some are going to Nevada. I'll be going to Nevada. We're making a big speech tomorrow in Atlanta and then we're going right to Nevada.


And I think we're going to do terrific and the SEC's (ph) going to be very, very exciting. We expect to do very, very well. Very well ...






 I want to just say thank you to my family. It's been not easy for them. They don't see me anymore. I'm making speeches all the time and I have a great. I really have a great family so I just want to thank all of you.


And Ivanka -- you know we have a hospital ready just in case. In South Carolina we're going to have a baby. There's nothing wrong with that, right? So ...






 Could be -- it could be any second. It could even be before I'm finished but it's -- but she insisted on being here. It was so important to Ivanka to insist on being here so thank you. Really good and Jared, Vanessa, Don.


We have a wonderful lieutenant governor who backed us very early in the process.






 You know Henry, right? The lieutenant governor of South Carolina. I will take him over the governor anytime because we won. We won ...






 He handle that very nicely. He's tough. He's very tough. Tiffany, Eric, Lara and Melania. Melania, say something. Go ahead, please ...






M. TRUMP: Just want to say an amazing place -- South Carolina. Congratulation to my husband. He was working very hard and he loves you. We love you and we're going ahead to Nevada. And we will see what happen (sic). He would be the best president ...






 And representing some very, very wonderful children, Ivanka. Just say a few words.






I. TRUMP: Thank you, South Carolina. This is an amazing, amazing night. The momentum since the beginning of this campaign has been unbelievable and that's because my father's message resonants so deeply with so many people. So as our family we're incredibly proud. We're incredibly grateful to each of you so thank you for being here to support us. And I will say this, my father is an incredibly hard worker and he'll be working for each and every one of you. So together we'll make America great again. Thank you ...






 Thank you very much. Thank you very much. So I was watching upstairs and it was really amazing to be watching what I was watching. And some of the pundits and overall fair but not too much. But a number of the pundits said, "well, if a couple of the other candidates dropped out if you add their scores together it's going to equal Trump."


But these geniuses -- they're geniuses -- they don't understand that as people drop out I'm going to get a lot of those votes also. You don't just ...






 You don't just add them together. So I think we're going to do very, very well. I think we're going to do very well. I want to also congratulate the other candidates. In particular I have to say Ted and Marco did a really good job and they got -- they did quite well as I understand. No, come on. Just one minute. Come on. One second, right? Good.


OK. We go back to war tomorrow morning. Tomorrow morning we'll be back but I just want to congratulate the other candidates. There's nothing easy about running for president, I can tell you. It's tough, it's nasty, it's mean, it's vicious, it's beautiful.


(LAUGHTER)


 When you win it's beautiful and we're going to start -- we are going to start winning for our country. We're going to start winning.






 Because our country doesn't win anymore. Doesn't win. We don't win with the military, we can't beat ISIS. We have great military but we can't beat ISIS. We don't win on trade. You look at what China's doing to us, what Japan does to us, what Mexico is just killing us at the border -- at the border and with trade. Mexico is killing us -- absolutely. We'll do the wall. Don't worry. We're going to do the wall.


  We're going to do the wall and by the way, who's going to pay for the wall?






 Mexico's going to pay for the wall and it's very easy. The other politicians come down, "you can't get Mexico to pay for the wall." I said, "100 percent." We have a $58 billion trade deficit with Mexico. The wall is going to cost $10 to $12 billion, OK? Believe me, they will pay. One of the officials -- actually, one of the ex-officials from Mexico had a news conference.


And he announced that we will not be paying for the wall. Who does Mr. Trump think he is? They came to me -- the press. These people -- look at all those cameras back there.






 The press came to me and they told me that he said that he would not pay for the wall. Do you have a comment? I said, "yes. The wall just got 10 feet taller."






 It's true. And I love Mexico. I love Mexico, I love China, I love many of these countries that rip us off because we have leaders that are incomptent and don't know what they're doing. I love these countries. They're great. I have thousands and thousands of Hispanics. We're going to Nevada.


I lead -- I lead with the Hispanics. I'm leading in every poll with the Hispanics. They love me, I love them. The problem is -- the problem is that the leaders of these countries whether it's Mexico or Japan or Viet Nam which is just doing a big number now all of a sudden or China in particular -- that's the big one. The greatest abuse of a country that I think I've ever seen financially -- China.


What they've done to us is the greatest single theft in the history of the world. They've taken our jobs, they've taken our money, they've taken everything. We're bringing our jobs back, folks. We're bringing our jobs back. We're going to bring them back ...






 And I know how to do it. We've had so many -- we've had so many incredible endorsements and to me getting the greatest business people to endorse me is very important. Carl Icahn endorsed me, so many others have endorsed me.


And we're going to put these great business people in charge of trade and when China wants to come and negotiate, they're going to negotiate not with a political hack which is what they have now. They're going to negotiate with the best business minds in the world and we have them in this country.


  So we're going to do a lot of beautiful work. We're going to terminate Obamacare. It's going to terminated. It's going to be over ...






 It's going to be repealed and it's going to be replaced. And you're going to have much better health care at a much smaller cost because Obamacare -- if you look -- look at the increases in your Obamacare. Twenty-five, 35, 45, even 55 percent. It's dead. It's not working. We're going to go to a plan that's going to be so much better and so much less expensive.






 So second amendment by the way -- this is a room loves the second amendment. Thank you, fellows. This is a room loves and cherishes the second amendment. We are going to protect our second amendment. Totally ...






 Common core is gone. We are getting rid of common core. We're brining education to a local level. The people in this community -- every time I see them they want education locally. The parents, the teachers. They want to do it -- they don't want bureaucrats in Washington telling them how to educate their children.






 We spend as a nation more for education per pupil than any other nation in the world. Not even close. More per pupil -- second place doesn't even exist it's so different. And yet out of 30 countries we're ranked number 30. You have China, you have Norway, Swenden, Denmark and then you have number 30, the United States. So we spend the most and we're at the bottom of the heap. It's not going to happen anymore, folks. It's not going to happen anymore.






 We are going to build our military which I thank because a number of the people came down and a number of the pundits in Washington I -- we love our military.






 We love our military. And by the way we love our police. Our police are terrific. We love our police ...






 They are not being treated properly. We're going to build our military so big, so good, so strong, so powerful that nobody is ever going to mess with us, folks.


  And we're going to buy -- we're going to buy the equipment that our generals, our soldiers, that everybody that's in the know want. We're not buying equipment that sells because they have political pull (ph). Because they take campaign and they give campaign contributions.


We are going to get the equipment that they want, not the equipment that they're told to have by senators and congressmen in Washington. We're going to have great equipment.






 And the reason I can say that is I'm self-funding my campaign. I'm not getting millions of dollars from all of these ...






 I'm not getting millions of dollars from all of these special interests and lobbyists and donors that once they get it they literally do whatever the politicians want. That's not going to happen. And we're going to take care of our vets. We love our vets and they're being treated terribly. We're taking care of our vets.






 So we're now off to Nevada and it's a great state. We have great people. We have great people in our nation. No matter where we go -- I went to Mobile, Alabama -- 35,000 people. We went to Oklahoma recently twice -- 20,000 people, 20,000 people. No matter where we go we fill up the arenas.


Over here the other day we had a 9,000 -- we had a 10,000 -- we have people. The only thing that stops the crowds are the walls because we can't get them in. We have to send thousands of people away.


Time Magazine -- Time Magazine last year did an incredible cover story. They said "it's a movement." And that's what it is. It's an incredible movement with incredible people. Incredible people.






 It's an incredible movement with incredible people. I tell you. And whether we go -- honestly whether we go to Dallas or whether we go anywhere you say -- you go to L.A. -- you go anywhere you say. Our people are incredible. And our theme -- what's our theme? You know it, right?






 Our theme which I love may be the greatest theme of all time, right? And the word again eventually is going to come off. We're going to get rid of the whole theme because what's going to happen -- make America great again, right?


And the last two weeks because I've gotten to see so many -- I guess millions when you add them all up with all of these rooms and all of these speeches. And I've met so many people. But the people are so incredible that I've been saying make America great again and it's going to be greater than ever before. That's the kind of potential we have. Greater then every before.


I dont see how there is any room for misunderstanding or misinterpretation of the statement I made on June 16th during my Presidential announcement speech. Here is what I said, and yet this statement is deliberately distorted by the media:


"When Mexico (meaning the Mexican Government) sends its people, theyre not sending their best. Theyre not sending you (pointing to the audience). Theyre not sending you (pointing again). Theyre sending people that have lots of problems, and theyre bringing those problems to us. Theyre bringing drugs.Theyre bringing crime. Theyre rapists. And some, I assume, are good people! But I speak to border guards and they tell us what were getting. And it only makes common sense. Theyre sending us not the right people. Its coming from more than Mexico. Its coming from all over South and Latin America, and its coming probably from the Middle East. But we dont know. Because we have no protection and we have no competence, we dont know whats happening. And its got to stop and its got to stop fast."


What can be simpler or more accurately stated? The Mexican Government is forcing their most unwanted people into the United States. They are, in many cases, criminals, drug dealers, rapists, etc. This was evident just this week when, as an example, a young woman in San Francisco was viciously killed by a 5 time deported Mexican with a long criminal record, who was forced back into the United States because they didnt want him in Mexico. This is merely one of thousands of similar incidents throughout the United States. In other words, the worst elements in Mexico are being pushed into the United States by the Mexican
government. The largest suppliers of heroin, cocaine and other illicit drugs are Mexican cartels that arrange to have Mexican immigrants trying to cross the borders and smuggle in the drugs. The Border Patrol knows this. Likewise, tremendous infectious disease is pouring across the border. The United States has become a dumping ground for Mexico and, in fact, for many other parts of the world. On the other hand, many fabulous people come in from Mexico and our country is better for it. But these people are here legally, and are severely hurt by those coming in illegally. I am proud to say that I know many hard working Mexicansmany of them are working for and with me...and, just like our country, my organization is better for it.


The Mexican Government wants an open border as long as its a ONE WAY open border into the United States. Not only are they killing us at the border, but they are killing us on trade ... and the country of Mexico is making billions of dollars in doing so.


I have great respect for Mexico and love their people and their peoples great spirit. The problem is, however, that their leaders are far smarter, more cunning, and better negotiators than ours. To the citizens of the United States, who I will represent far better than anyone else as President, the Mexican government is not our friend...and why should they be when the relationship is totally one sided in their favor on both illegal immigration and trade. I have pointed this out during my speeches and it is something Mexico doesnt want me to say. In actuality, it was only after my significant rise in the polls that Univision, previously my friend, went ballistic. I believe that my examples of bad trade deals for the United States was of even more concern to the Mexican government than my talk of border security.


I have lost a lot during this Presidential run defending the people of the United States. I have always heard that it is very hard for a successful person to run for President. Macys, NBC, Serta and NASCAR have all taken the weak and very sad position of being politically correct even though they are wrong in terms of what is good for our country. Univision, because 70% of their business comes from Mexico, in my opinion, is being dictated to by the Mexican Government. The last thing Mexico wants is Donald Trump as President in that I will make great trade deals for the United States and will have an impenetrable border--only legally approved people will come through easily.


Interestingly, Univision has just announced they are attempting to go public despite very poor and even negative earnings, which is not a good situation for a successful IPO or high stock pricenot to mention that I am currently suing them for breach of contract. Remember, Univision is the one who began this charade in the first place, and they are owned by one of Hillary Clintons biggest backers. After the speech was made, there were numerous compliments and indeed, many rave "reviews"there was very little criticism. It wasnt until a week after my announcement that people started to totally distort these very easy to understand words. If there was something stated incorrectly, it would have been brought up immediately and with great enthusiasm.


The issues I have addressed, and continue to address, are vital steps to Make America Great Again! Additionally, I would be the best jobs President that God ever created. Lets get to work!






TRUMP: (OFF-MIKE) This was going to be a speech on Hillary Clinton and all of the bad things and we all know whats going on, and especially how poor shed do as president in these very, very troubled times of radical Islamic terrorism.
TRUMP: Even her former Secret Service agent, whos seen her under pressure and in times of stress, has stated that she lacks the temperament and integrity to be our president. There will be plenty of opportunity to discuss these important issues at a later time, and I will deliver that speech very, very soon.
But today, theres only one thing to discuss, the growing threat of terrorism inside of our borders. The attack on the Pulse nightclub in Orlando, Florida, was the worst terror strike on our soil since September 11th, and the worst mass shooting in our countrys history.
So many people  its just hard to believe, but just so many people dead, so many people gravely injured, so much carnage, such a disgrace. The horror is beyond description. The families of these wonderful people are totally devastated, and they will be forever. Likewise, our whole nation and indeed the whole world is devastated.
We express our deepest sympathies to the victims, the wounded, and their families. We mourn as one people for our nations loss, and pledge our support to any and all who need it. I would like to ask now that we all observe a moment of silence for the victims of this attack.
Thank you. Our nation stands together in solidarity with the members of Orlandos LGBT community. They have been through something that nobody could ever experience. This is a very dark moment in Americas history. A radical Islamic terrorist targeted the nightclub, not only because he wanted to kill Americans, but in order to execute gay and lesbian citizens, because of their sexual orientation.
Its a strike at the heart and soul of who we are as a nation. Its an assault on the ability of free people to live their lives, love who they want, and express their identity. Its an attack on the right of every single American to live in peace and safety in their own country.
We need to respond to this attack on America as one united people, with force, purpose, and determination. But the current politically correct response cripples our ability to talk and to think and act clearly. Were not acting clearly, were not talking clearly, weve got problems.
If we dont get tough, and if we dont get smart, and fast, were not going to have our country anymore. There will be nothing, absolutely nothing, left. The killer, whose name I will not use, or ever say, was born in Afghan, of Afghan parents, who immigrated to the United States.
His father published support for the Afghan Taliban, a regime which murders those who dont share its radical views, and they murdered plenty. The father even said he was running for president of Afghanistan. The bottom line is that the only reason the killer was in America in the first place, was because we allowed his family to come here.
That is a fact, and its a fact we need to talk about. We have a dysfunctional immigration system, which does not permit us to know who we let into our country, and it does not permit us to protect our citizens properly. We have an incompetent administration.
And if Im elected president, that will not change, I will tell you, that will not change over the next four years. We have an administration that will not change. But if I get in there, its going to change, and its going to change quickly. Were going from totally incompetent to just the opposite, believe me.


TRUMP: Thank you.
With 50 people dead and perhaps more ultimately and dozens more wounded, we cannot afford to talk around issues anymore. We have to address these issues head-on. I called for a ban after San Bernardino and was met with great scorn and anger but now many years and I have to say many years but many are saying that I was right to do so. And although the pause is temporary we must find out what is going on. We have to do it.
It will be lifted  this ban  when and as a nation were in a position to properly and perfectly screen these people coming into our country. Theyre pouring in and we dont know what were doing. The immigration laws of the United States give the president powers to suspend entry into the country of any class of persons. Now, any class  it really is determined and to be determined by the president for the interests of the United States. And its as he or she deems appropriate. Hopefully its he in this case.


Thank you. I will use this power to protect the American people. When Im elected I will suspend immigration from areas of the world where theres a proven history of terrorism against the United States, Europe or our allies until we fully understand how to end these threats. After a full ...


Thank you.
And by the way we have no choice. After a full and partial and long  really long overdue security assessment we will develop a responsible immigration policy that serves the interests and values of America.


We cannot continue to allow thousands upon thousands of people to pour into our country many of whom have the same thought process as this savage killer. Many of the principles of radical Islam are incompatible with Western values and institutions.
 Remember this, radical Islam is anti-woman, anti-gay and anti- American.


I refuse to allow America to become a place where gay people, Christian people, Jewish people are targets of persecution and intimation by radical Islamic preachers of hate and violence.


This is not just a national security issue. Its a quality of life issue. If we want to protect the quality of life for all Americans  women and children, gay and straight, Jews and Christians and all people then we need to tell the truth about radical Islam and we need to do it now.


We need to tell the truth also about how radical Islam is coming to our shores. And its coming ...


With these people, folks, its coming. Were importing radical Islamic terrorism into the West through a failed immigration system and through an intelligence community held back by our president. Even our own FBI director has admitted that we cannot effectively check the backgrounds of people were letting into America. All of the September 11th hijackists were issued visas. Large numbers of Somali refugees in Minnesota have tried to join ISIS.
The Boston bombers came here through political asylum. The male shooter in San Bernardino again whose name I will not mention was the child of immigrants from Pakistan and he brought his wife, the other terrorist from Saudi Arabia through another one of our easily exploited visa programs.


TRUMP: Immigration from Afghanistan into the United States has increased nearly five fold  five fold in just one year. According to Pew Research, 99 percent of the people in Afghanistan support oppressive sharia law. We admit many more, and thats just the way it is. We admit many more from other countries in the region.
And Ill tell you what: They share these oppressive views and values. We want to remain a free and open society. Then, and if we do, then we have to control our borders. We have to control, and we have to control them now, not later. Right now.


Thank you.
Yet Hillary Clinton, for months, and despite so many attacks, repeatedly refused to even say the words radical Islam until I challenged her yesterday. And, guess what, she will probably say them. She sort of has said them, but lets see what happens. She really has no choice, but she doesnt want to.
However, shes really been forced, and she has been forced to say these words. She supports, and the reason is, she supports so much of what is wrong, and what is wrong with this country, and whats going wrong with our country and our borders. She has no clue, in my opinion, what radical Islam is and she wont speak honestly about it if she does, in fact, know. Shes in total denial, and her continuing reluctance to ever name the enemy broadcasts weakness across the entire world  true weakness.
I dont know if you know this, but just a few weeks before San Bernardino, the slaughter, thats all it was was a slaughter, Hillary Clinton explained her refusal to say the words "radical Islam." Here is what she said, exact quote, "Muslims are peaceful and tolerant people, and have nothing whatsoever to do with terrorism." That is Hillary Clinton.
So, she says the solution is to ban guns. They tried that in France which has among the toughest gun laws anywhere in the world, and 130 people were brutally murdered by Islamic terrorists in cold blood. Her plan is to disarm law abiding Americans, abolishing the Second Amendment, and leaving only the bad guys and terrorists with guns. No good. Not going to happen, folks. Not going to happen. Not going to happen.
Thank you.
She wants to take away Americans guns and then admit the very people who want to slaughter us. Let them come into the country, we dont have guns. Let them come in, let them have all the fun they want.
I will be meeting with the NRA, which has given me their earliest endorsement in a presidential race, to discuss how to ensure Americans have the means to protect themselves in this age of terror. I will be always defending the Second Amendment.


Thank you. Thank you.
The bottom line is that Hillary supports policies that bring the threat of radical Islam into American and allow it to grow oversees, and it is growing. In fact, Hillary Clintons catastrophic immigration plan will bring vastly more radical Islamic immigration into this country, threatening not only our society but our entire way of life. When it comes to radical Islamic terrorism, ignorance is not bliss. Its deadly  totally deadly.
The Obama administration, with the support of Hillary Clinton and others, has also damaged our security by restraining our intelligence gathering and we have, just, no intelligence gathering information. We need this information so badly, and he stopped it. We dont have the support. We dont have the support of the law enforcement system because Obama is not letting them do their job. They are not being allowed to do their job. And, they can do it well  better than anybody.
We need a new leader. We need a new leader fast.


TRUMP: Thank you.
They have put political correctness above common sense, above your safety, and above all else. I refuse to be politically correct.


I want to do the right thing. I want to straighten things out and I want to make America great again.


The days of deadly ignorance will end, and they will end soon if Im elected. As president I will give our intelligence community, law enforcement and military the tools they need to prevent terrorist attacks. They dont have those tools now.


We need an intelligence gathering system second to none. Second to none. That includes better cooperation between state, local and federal officials, and with our allies, very importantly. I will have an Attorney General, a Director of National Intelligence and a Secretary of Defense wholl know how to fight a war on radical Islamic terrorism.


And they will have the support that they need to get the job done right, not like it is right now. Its not right.


We also must ensure the American people are provided the information they need to understand the threat. The Senate subcommittee on Immigration has already identified hundreds of immigrants charged with terrorist activities inside the United States since September 11th. Nearly a year ago, the Senate Subcommittee asked President Obamas Department of Justice, State and Homeland Security to provide the immigration history of all terrorists inside the United States. These Departments refused to comply. Nobody even knows why. They refused to comply.
President Obama must release the full and complete immigration histories of all individuals implicated in terrorist activities of any kind since September 11th. So important. The public has a right to know how these people got here, how they came on to this great land, why are they here?


We have to screen applicants to know whether they are affiliated with or supporting radical groups and beliefs, very simple. We have to control the amount of future immigration into this country and we have to prevent large pockets of radicalization from forming inside America. Not complicated.


Every  and just think of this. Take a look. Every single event, even a single individual can be devastating, and all you have to do is take a look at what happened in Orlando and what happened in other cases. Just a single event. And just one person. Can you imagine what theyll do in large groups, which were allowing now to come here.
Truly our President doesnt know what hes doing. Hes failed us and hes failed us badly. Under his leadership this situation will not get any better, it will only get worse. And Ive been saying that for a long time. Each year the United States permanently admits 100,000 immigrants from the Middle East and many more from Muslim countries outside of the Middle East. Our government has been admitting ever- growing numbers, year after year, without any effective plan for our own security.
In fact, Clintons State Department was in charge of admissions and the admissions process for people applying to enter from overseas. Having learned nothing from these attacks, she now plans to massively increase admissions without a screening plan including a 500 percent increase in Syrian refugees coming into our country. Tell me, tell me  how stupid is that?
This could be a better, bigger, more horrible version than the legendary Trojan Horse ever was. Altogether, under the Clinton plan, youd be admitting hundreds of thousands of refugees from the Middle East with no system to vet them, or to prevent the radicalization of the children and their children. Not only their children, by the way, theyre trying to take over our children and convince them how wonderful ISIS is and how wonderful Islam is and we dont know whats happening.
TRUMP: The burden is on Hillary Clinton to tell us why she believes immigration from these dangerous countries should be increased without any effective system to really to screen. Were not screening people.
So why dont we have an effective screening system? We dont. Were being laughed at all over the world. The burden is on Hillary Clinton to tell us why we should admit anyone into our country who supports violence of any kind against gay and lesbian Americans. The burden is on Hillary Clinton to tell us how she will pay for it, her plan will cost hundreds of billions of dollars long term.
Wouldnt this be money better spent rebuilding America for our current population including the many poor people already living here. We have cities, we have inner cities...


We have poverty all over and this is how were spending billions of dollars. We have to stop the tremendous flow of Syrian refugees into the United States. We dont know who they are, they have no documentation and we dont know what theyre planning and we wont unless we have proper supervisor and proper leadership in which case theyre out of here. What I want...


What I want is common sense. I want a mainstream immigration policy that promotes American values. Thats a choice I put before the American people. A mainstream immigration policy designed to benefit America or Hillary Clintons radical immigration policy designed to benefit politically correct special interests. Thats all it is. Weve got to get smart and tough and vigilant and weve got to do it now because later is too late  going to be too late for our country.
The media talks about home grown terrorism but Islamic radicalism and thats a very, very important term  a term that the president refuses to use and the networks that nurture it are imports from overseas whether you like it or whether you dont like it. Yes, there are many radicalized people already inside our country as a result of poor policies of the past.
But the whole point is that we will be much, much and it will be easier to deal with our current problem if we dont keep on bringing people who add to the problem. And thats what theyre doing. Were letting all of these people  hundreds of thousands of people come in and all theyre doing is adding to this incredible problem we have.
For instance, the controversial mosque attended by the Boston bombers had at its founder and as its founder an immigrant from overseas charged in an assassination plot. This shooter and amazingly in Orlando was the child of an immigrant father who supported one of the most repressive regimes on earth. Why would we admit people who support violent hatred?
Hillary Clinton can never claim to be a friend of the gay community as long as she continues to support immigration policies that bring Islamic extremists to our country and who suppress women, gays and anyone who doesnt share their views or values.


She cant have it both ways. She cant claim to be supportive of these communities while trying to increase the number of people coming in who want to oppress these same communities. How does this kind of immigration make our lives better? How does this kind of immigration make our country better? Why does Hillary Clinton want to bring people in in vast numbers who reject our values? Why? Explain.
Ask yourself who is really the friend of women and the LGBT community, Donald Trump with actions or Hillary Clinton with her words?
TRUMP: I will tell you who the better friend is and some day I believe that will be proven out bigly (ph).


And by the way the LGBT community is just  whats happened to them is just so sad and to be thinking about where their policies are currently with this administration is a disgrace to that community, I will tell you right now.
Clinton wants to allow radical Islamic terrorists to pour into our country. They enslave women, and they murder gays. I dont want them in our country.


Immigration is a privilege, and we should not let anyone into this country who doesnt support our communities. All of our communities, every single one of them. Americans already admitted four times more immigrants than any country on Earth, anybody in the world. Four times more. At least, because we dont even know whos coming in. And we continue to admit millions more with no real checks or scrutiny.
Not surprisingly, wages for our workers havent budged. In almost 20 years. You wonder why we get the crowds, you wonder why we get this tremendous support, you wonder why Ive gotten more votes than any Republican in any primary in the history of the Republican Party? Take a look at that. Take a look at your security, take a look at the wages. For 18 years theyve been stagnant, theyve even gone down.
So whether its a matter of national security, or financial security, we cant afford to keep on going like this. Cannot afford it. We owe $19 trillion in debt. And no longer have any options. Our communities from all backgrounds are ready for some relief. This is not an act of offense against anyone. Its really an act of defense. I want us all, all of us, to work together. We have to form a partnership, with our Muslim communities. We have Muslim communities in this country that are great, and we have to form that partnership.
Now, the Muslim community, so important. They have to work with us. They have to cooperate with law enforcement and turn in the people who they know are bad. They know it. And they have to do it, and they have to do it forthwith. I want to fix our schools. I want to fix our bridges. And our jobs market, were going to have it rocket again, were going to make great trade deals. But I want every American to succeed including Muslims.
But the Muslims have to work with us. They have to work with us. They know whats going on. They know that he was bad. They knew the people in San Bernardino were bad. But you know what? They didnt turn them in. And you know what? We had death, and destruction.
Hillary Clinton wants to empty out the Treasury to bring people into the country that include individuals who preach hate against our citizens. I want to protect our citizens, all of our citizens. The terrorist attack on Pulse nightclub demands a full and complete investigation into every single aspect of the assault. In San Bernardino, as an example, people who knew what was going on, they knew exactly, but they used the excuse of racial profiling for not reporting it. They said oh, "We thought so but we didnt want to use racial profiling." Which was probably an excuse given to them by their lawyer, so they dont get in trouble.
We need to know what the killer discussed with his relatives, parents, friends and associates. We need to know if he was affiliated with any radical mosques or radical activists and what, if any, is their immigration status. We have to know, and we have to know fast. We need to know if he traveled anywhere and who he traveled with. We need to know, and we need to make sure, every single last person involved in this plan, including anyone who knew something but didnt tell us, is brought to justice, so when people know whats going on and they dont tell us, and we have an attack, and people die, these people have to have consequences. Big consequences.


America must do more  much more  to protect its citizens, especially people who are potential victims of crimes based on their backgrounds or sexual orientation, as you just saw in Orlando.
TRUMP: It also means we must change our foreign policy. The decision to overthrow the regime in Libya, then pushing for the overthrow of the regime in Syria, among other things, without plans for the day after, have created space for ISIS to expand and grow like nobody has ever seen before.
These actions, along with our disastrous Iran deal, have also reduced our ability to work in partnership with our Muslim allies in the region. That is why our new goal must be to defeat Islamic terrorism not nation building. No more nation building. Its never going to work.
And by the way weve spent almost $5 trillion over the years on trying to nation build in the Middle East and it has been complete and total disaster. Were further away now than we were 15 years ago. For instance, the last major NATO mission was Hillary Clintons war in Libya. That mission helped to unleash ISIS on a new continent.
Ive said NATO need to change its focus and stop terrorism. We have to focus on terrorism and we have to stop terrorism. Since Ive raised that criticism and its OK. Ive gotten no credit for it but these are minor details  NATO has since announced a new initiative  front page of the Wall Street Journal four days ago focused on just that. America must unite the whole civilized world in the fight against Islamic terrorism.


Pretty much like we did with communism during the Cold War. We tried it President Obamas way, doesnt work. He gave the world his apology tour. We got ISIS and many other problems in return. Thats what we got. Remember the famous apology tour. Were sorry for everything.
Id like to conclude my remarks today by again expressing our solitarily with the people of Orlando who have come under this horrific attack. When Im president I pledge to protect and defend all Americans who live inside our borders. Wherever they come from, wherever they were born, I dont care. All Americans living here and following our laws not other laws will be protected.


Thank you. Thank you. Were going to be tough and were going to be smart and were going to do it right. America will be a tolerant and open society. America will also be a safe society. We will protect our borders at home. We will defeat ISIS overseas. We have no choice. We will ensure every parent can raise their children in peace and safety. We will make America rich again. We will make America safe again. We will make America great again. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you very much.


Thank you. Thank you very much, everybody. Appreciate it. Thank you.


Good evening. Thank you very much. I speak to you today as a lifelong supporter and true friend of Israel. I am a newcomer to politics but not to backing the Jewish state.
In late 2001, weeks after the attacks on New York City, and on Washington, and frankly the attacks on all of us, attacks that perpetrated... and they were perpetrated by the Islamic fundamentalists, Mayor Rudy Giuliani visited Israel to show solidarity with terror victims. I sent my plane because I backed the mission for Israel 100 percent.
In Spring of 2004, at the height of the violence in the Gaza Strip, I was the Grand Marshal of the 40th Salute to Israel Parade, the largest single gathering in support of the Jewish state. It was a very dangerous time for Israel and frankly for anyone supporting Israel, many people turned down this honor. I did not. I took the risk and Im glad I did.
But I didnt come here tonight to pander to you about Israel. Thats what politicians do. All talk, no action, believe me. I came here to speak to you about where I stand on the future of American relations with our strategic ally, our unbreakable friendship, and our cultural brother. The only democracy in the Middle East, the State of Israel.
My number one priority is to dismantle the disastrous deal with Iran. I have been in business a long time. I know deal-making and let me tell you, this deal is catastrophic, for America, for Israel, and for the whole of the Middle East.
The problem here is fundamental. We have rewarded the worlds leading state sponsor of terror with $150 billion dollars, and we received absolutely nothing in return.
Ive studied this issue in great detail. I would say actually, greater by far than anybody else. Believe me, and its a bad deal. The biggest concern with the deal is not necessarily that Iran is going to violate it, because already, as you know, it has. The bigger problem is that they can keep the terms and still get the bomb by simply running out the clock. And of course, theyll keep the billions and billions of dollars that we so stupidly and foolishly gave them.
The deal doesnt even require Iran to dismantle its military nuclear capability. Yes, it places limits on its military nuclear program for only a certain number of years. But when those restrictions expire, Iran will have an industrial size military nuclear capability ready to go, and with zero provision for delay, no matter how bad Irans behavior is. Terrible, terrible situation that we are all placed in, and especially Israel.
When Im president, I will adopt a strategy that focuses on three things when it comes to Iran. First, we will stand up to Irans aggressive push to destabilize and dominate the region. Iran is a very big problem and will continue to be, but if Im not elected President, I know how to deal with trouble, and believe me, thats why Im going to be elected president folks. And we are leading in every poll, remember that please.
Iran is a problem in Iraq, a problem in Syria, a problem in Lebanon, a problem in Yemen, and will be a very, very major problem for Saudi Arabia. Literally every day, Iran provides more and better weapons to support their puppet states. Hezbollah, Lebanon received, and Ill tell you what, it has received sophisticated anti-ship weapons, anti-aircraft weapons, and GPS systems and rockets. like very few people anywhere in the world, and certainly very few countries have.
Now theyre in Syria trying to establish another front against Israel from the Syrian side of the Golan Heights. In Gaza, Iran is supporting Hamas and Islamic Jihad. And in the West Bank theyre openly offering Palestinians $7,000 per terror attack and $30,000 for every Palestinian terrorists home thats been destroyed. A deplorable, deplorable situation. Iran is financing military forces throughout the Middle East, and its absolutely incredible that we handed them over $150 billion to do even more toward the many horrible acts of terror.
Secondly, we will totally dismantle Irans global terror network, which is big and powerful, but not powerful like us. Iran has seeded terror groups all over the world. During the last five years, Iran has perpetrated terror attacks in 25 different countries on five continents. Theyve got terror cells everywhere, including in the western hemisphere very close to home. Iran is the biggest sponsor of terrorism around the world and we will work to dismantle that reach, believe me, believe me.
Third, at the very least, we must enforce the terms of the previous deal, to hold Iran totally accountable. And we will enforce it like youve never seen a contract enforced before folks. Believe me.
Iran has already since the deal is in place, test-fired ballistic missiles three times. Those ballistic missiles with a range of 1,250 miles were designed to intimidate not only Israel, which is only 600 miles away, but also intended to frighten Europe, and maybe someday hit even the United States. And were not going to let that happen. Were not letting it happen, and were not letting it happen to Israel, believe me.
Do you want to hear something really shocking? As many of the great people in this room know, painted on those missiles in both Hebrew and Farsi, were the words "Israel must be wiped off the face of the earth." You can forget that!
What kind of demented minds write that in Hebrew? And heres, you talk about twisted, heres another twisted part: testing these missiles does not even violate the horrible deal that we made! The deal is silent on test missiles, but those tests do violate United Nations Security Council resolutions. The problem is, no one has done anything about it. We will, we will, I promise we will.
Which brings me to my next point. The utter weakness and incompetence of the United Nations. The United Nations is not a friend of democracy. Its not a friend to freedom. Its not a friend even to the United States of America, where as you know, it has its home. And it surely is not a friend to Israel.
With President Obama in his final year, yay! He may be the worst thing to ever happen to Israel, believe me. Believe me, and you know it, and you know it better than anybody.
So with the president in his final year, discussions have been swirling about an attempt to bring a Security Council resolution on terms of an eventual agreement between Israel and Palestine. Let me be clear. An agreement imposed by the United Nations would be a total and complete disaster. The United States must oppose this resolution and use the power of our veto, which I will use as president, 100 percent.
When people ask why, its because thats not how you make a deal. Deals are made when parties come together. They come to a table and they negotiate. Each side must give up something it values, I mean we have to do something where theres value in exchange for something that it requires. Thats what a deal is. A deal is really something that when we impose it on Israel and Palestine, we bring together a group of people that come up with something. Thats not going to happen with the United Nations. It will only further, very importantly, it will only further delegitimize Israel. It will be a catastrophe and a disaster for Israel. Its not going to happen folks.
And further, it would reward Palestinian terrorism, because every day theyre stabbing Israelis, and even Americans. Just last week, American Taylor Allen Force, a West Point grad, phenomenol young person who served in Iraq and Afghanistan, was murdered in the street by a knife-wielding Palestinian. You dont reward behavior like that. You can not do it! There is only one way you treat that kind of behavior. You have to confront it!
So, its not up the United Nations to go with a solution. Its really the parties that must negotiate a resolution themselves. You have no choice. They have to do it themselves, or it will never hold up anyway. The United States can be useful as a facilitator of negotiations, but no one should be telling Israel that it must abide by some agreement made by others thousands of miles away that dont even really know whats happening to Israel, to anything in the area. Its so preposterous. Were not going to let that happen. When Im president, believe me, I will veto any attempt by the UN to impose its will on the Jewish state. It will be vetoed 100 percent.
You see, I know about deal-making. Thats what I do. I wrote The Art of the Deal. One of the best-selling, all-time, and I mean seriously, Im saying one of, because Ill be criticized as though I say the, so Im going to be very diplomatic. One of... Ill be criticized. I think it is number one, but why take a chance. One of the best-selling, all-time books about deals and deal making.
To make a great deal, you need two willing participants. We know Israel is willing to deal. Israel has been trying to sit down at the negotiating table without pre-conditions for years. You had Camp David in 2000, where Prime Minister Barak made an incredible offer, maybe even too generous. Arafat rejected it. In 2008, Prime Minister Olmert made an equally generous offer. The Palestinian Authority rejected it also. Then John Kerry tried to come up with a framework and Abbas didnt even respond, not even to the Secretary of State of the United States of America. They didnt even respond.
When I become President, the days of treating Israel like a second-class citizen will end on Day One. And when I say something, I mean it. I mean it. I will meet with Prime Minister Netanyahu immediately. I have known him for many years and well be able to work closely together to help bring stability and peace to Israel and to the entire region.
Meanwhile, every single day, you have rampant incitement and children being taught to hate Israel and hate the Jews. It has to stop. When you live in a society where the firefighters are the heros, little kids want to be firefighters. When you live in a society where athletes and movie stars are the heroes, little kids want to be athletes and movie stars. In Palestinian society, the heroes are those who murder Jews. we cant let this continue. We cant let this happen any longer.
You cannot achieve peace if terrorists are treated as martyrs. Glorifying terrorists is a tremendous barrier to peace. It is a horrible, horrible way to think. Its a barrier that cant be broken. That will end, and itll end soon, believe me. In Palestinian textbooks and mosques, youve got a culture of hatred that has been fermenting there for years, and if we want to achieve peace, theyve got to go out, and theyve got to start this educational process. They have to end education of hatred. They have to end it, and now!
There is no moral equivalency. Israel does not name public squares after terrorists. Israel does not pay its children to stab random Palestinians. You see, what President Obama gets wrong about deal making is that he constantly applies pressure to our friends and rewards our enemies. And you see that happening all the time. That pattern practiced by the President and his administration, including former Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, who is a total disaster by the way. She and President Obama have treated Israel very, very badly. But its repeated itself over and over again, and has done nothing to embolden those who hate America. We saw that with releasing the $150 billion dollars to Iran in the hope that they would magically join the world community. It didnt happen.
President Obama thinks that applying pressure to Israel will force the issue, but its precisely the opposite that happened. Already, half of the population of Palestine has been taken over by the Palestinian ISIS in Hamas, and the other half refuses to confront the first half, so its a very difficult situation thats never going to get solved, unless you have great leadership right here in the United States. Well get it solved, one way or the other. We will get it solved. But when the United States stands with Israel, the chances of peace really rise, and rises exponentially. Thats what will happen when Donald Trump is President of the United States.
We will move the American embassy to the eternal capital of the Jewish people, Jerusalem. And we will send a clear signal that there is no daylight between America and our most reliable ally, the State of Israel. The Palestinians must come to the table knowing that the bond between the United States and Israel is absolutely, totally unbreakable. They must come to the table willing and able to stop the terror being committed on a daily basis against Israel. They must do that. And they must come to the table willing to accept that Israel is a Jewish State and it will forever exist as a Jewish State.
I love the people in this room. I love Israel. I love Israel. Ive been with Israel so long in terms of, Ive received some of my greatest honors from Israel. My father before me, incredible. My daughter Ivanka is about to have a beautiful Jewish baby. In fact it could be happening right now which would be very nice as far as Im concerned.
So I want to thank you very much. This has been a truly great honor. Thank you everybody. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Wow. Thank you very much. Hello. Id like to begin by thanking the people of Montana, South Dakota, New Mexico, New Jersey and California. We had some big, big days and we have some big numbers coming in, very big numbers.
Im truly honored by your support. Together, we accomplished what nobody thought was absolutely possible and you know what that is and were only getting started and its going to be beautiful, remember that.
Tonight we close one chapter in history and we begin another. Our campaign received more primary votes than any GOP campaign in history, no matter who it is, no matter who they are, we received more votes. This is a great feeling. Thats a great feeling.
This is not a testament to me but a testament to all of the people who believed real change, not Obama change, but real change is possible. Youve given me the honor to lead the Republican Party to victory this fall. Were going to do it. Were going to do it, folks. Were going to do it.
I understand the responsibility of carrying the mantle and I will never, ever let you down  too much work, too many people, blood, sweat and tears. Im never going to let you down. I will make you proud of your party and our movement, and thats what it is, is a movement.
Now recent polls have shown that Im beating Hillary Clinton and with all of her many problems and the tremendous mistakes that shes made and she has tremendous mistakes, we expect our lead to continue to grow and grow substantially. To everyone who voted for me throughout this campaign, I want to thank you. I want to thank you very, very much.
To those who voted for someone else in either party, I will work hard to earn your support and I will work very hard to earn that support. To all of those Bernie Sanders voters who have been left out in the cold by a rigged system of super delegates, we welcome you with open arms. And by the way, the terrible trade deals that Bernie was so vehemently against and hes right on that will be taken care of far better than anyone ever thought possible and thats what I do. We are going to have fantastic trade deals. Were going to start making money and bringing in jobs.
Now I know some people say Im too much of a fighter. My preference is always peace, however and Ive shown that. Ive shown that for a long time. I built an extraordinary business on relationships and deals that benefit all parties involved, always. My goal is always again to bring people together. But if Im forced to fight for something I really care about, I will never, ever back down and our country will never, ever back down.
Thank you. Ive fought for my family. Ive fought for my business. Ive fought for my employees. And now, Im going to fight for you, the American people like nobody has ever fought before. And Im not a politician fighting, Im me. Youre going to see some real good things happen.
Just remember this: Im going to be your champion. Im going to be Americas champion because you see this election isnt about Republican or Democrat; its about who runs this country  the special interests or the people and I mean the American people.
Every election year politicians promise change. Obama promised change and it didnt work out too well. And every year they fail to deliver. Why would politicians want to change a system thats totally rigged in order to keep them in power? Thats what theyre doing, folks. Why would politicians want to change a system thats made them and their friends very, very wealthy? I beat a rigged system by winning with overwhelming support, the only way you couldve done it  landslides all over the country with every demographic on track to win; 37 primary caucus victories in a field that began with 17 very talented people.
After years of disappointment, there is one thing we all have learned  we cant fix the rigged system by relying on very, and I mean this so, so strongly, on the very people who rigged it, and they rigged it, and do not ever think anything differently. We cant solve our problems by counting on the politicians who created our problems.
The Clintons have turned the politics of personal enrichment into an art form for themselves. Theyve made hundreds of millions of dollars selling access, selling favors, selling government contracts, and I mean hundreds of millions of dollars. Secretary Clinton even did all of the work on a totally illegal private server. Something about how shes getting away with this folks nobody understands.
Designed to keep her corrupt dealings out of the public record, putting the security of the entire country at risk and a President in a corrupt system is totally protecting her  not right. I am going to give a major speech on probably Monday of next week and were going to be discussing all of the things that have taken place with the Clintons. I think youre going to find it very informative and very, very interesting. I wonder if the press will want to attend, who knows.
Hillary Clinton turned the State Department into her private hedge fund  the Russians, the Saudis, the Chinese  all gave money to Bill and Hillary and got favorable treatment in return. Its a sad day in America when foreign governments with deep pockets have more influence in our own country than our great citizens.
I didnt need to do this. Its not easy, believe me. I didnt need to do it. But I felt I had to give back to our wonderful country which has been so good to me and to my family. Ive traveled to many of our states and seen the suffering in peoples eyes. Ive visited communities in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Indiana and Ohio whose manufacturing jobs, they literally, these jobs have virtually disappeared, an embarrassment to our country and its horrible. Ive embraced the victims of illegal immigration, moms and dads who have had to bury their own children because of people that shouldnt have been in the country  remember it, folks, remember it.
I visited the crumbling cities and the struggling schools. Ive seen our dilapidated airports, highways, bridges and Ive compared them to other countries where we see facilities so far superior to ours its really not to be believed, hard to imagine whats happened to our country. America is getting taken apart piece by piece, auctioned off, and just rapidly, auctioned off to the highest bidder. Were broke, were broke. We owe $19 trillion dollars going quickly to $21 trillion. Our infrastructure is a disaster. Our schools are failing. Crime is rising. People are scared. The last thing we need is Hillary Clinton in the White House or an extension of the Obama disaster.
What a crowd, what a crowd. Thank you all very much. We love our country, we love our country. But we can turn this all around. Were going to do it by putting America first. That commitment is the foundation for change thats been missing and its been missing for a long time. Its important to understand what America First means. It means on foreign policy we will never enter into any kind conflict unless it makes us safer as a nation. It has to make us safer as a nation. This is the opposite of Hillarys foreign policy which invaded Libya, destabilized Iraq, unleashed ISIS and threw Syria into chaos and created the mass migration which is wreaking havoc all over the world, and while putting Iran on the path to nuclear weapons and making them a dominant power in the Middle East and they are dominant and we have made them that way, folks. We have made them that way.
You better hope Im President. On trade, America First means the American worker will have his or her job protected from unfair foreign competition. Whats happening there is absolutely a disgrace. No PPP, youre right about that and you mean no PP. We are going, and remember this; we are only going to have great trade deals, OK. We are only going to have that. Were not going to approve, as somebody just said, the TransPacific Partnership which is a disaster, a disaster, for our country, almost as bad as NAFTA signed by Bill Clinton, which has just stripped our country of our factories and our manufacturing and moved them to other places, in particular Mexico. If its not a great deal for our country, we will not sign it. Its got to be great for our country, for our community, for everybody in here because believe me we are all suffering and were suffering bigly and its getting worse.
On energy policy, America First means opening up Americas great potential to bring wealth and prosperity to our own workers including our wonderful and hard-working miners who have been absolutely totally mistreated by this Administration.
On economic policy, America First means having tax and regulatory policies that keep jobs and wealth in the United States, substantially lowering taxes for middle class Americans and business; likewise, regulation which is strangling our economy which would be brought down from its present insane level. We will make it very, very good for our companies, for our small business and for people that want to survive and do well in our country.
On immigration policy, America First means protecting the jobs, wages and security of American workers, whether first or tenth generation. No matter who you are, were going to protect your job because let me tell you our jobs are being stripped from our country like were babies. The beauty of America First is that it brings us all together. Every American worker of every background is entitled to the same benefits, protections and rights and privileges; its got to be that way. Now, the people in charge say things cant change. Im here today to tell you that we have to change. We have no choice. We have to change.
Were going to put America back to work. Were going to make our own products. Were going to put America back to work. Were going to rebuild our inner cities which are absolutely a shame and so sad. Were going to take care of our African American people that have been mistreated for so long. Were going to make you and your family safe, secure and prosperous, prosperous again. Together, we will put the American people first again, first again.
We will make our communities wealthy. We will make our cities safe again. We will make our country strong again. Ladies and gentlemen, we will make America great again, remember. Thank you. Thank you very much everybody.


Thank you for joining me today.


This was going to be a speech on Hillary Clinton and how bad a President, especially in these times of Radical Islamic Terrorism, she would be.


Even her former Secret Service Agent, who has seen her under pressure and in times of stress, has stated that she lacks the temperament and integrity to be president.


There will be plenty of opportunity to discuss these important issues at a later time, and I will deliver that speech soon.


But today there is only one thing to discuss: the growing threat of terrorism inside of our borders.


The attack on the Pulse Nightclub in Orlando, Florida, was the worst terrorist strike on our soil since September 11th, and the worst mass shooting in our countrys history.


So many people dead, so many people gravely injured, so much carnage, such a disgrace.


The horror is beyond description.


The families of these wonderful people are totally devastated. Likewise, our whole nation, and indeed the whole world, is devastated.


We express our deepest sympathies to the victims, the wounded, and their families.


We mourn, as one people, for our nations loss  and pledge our support to any and all who need it.


I would like to ask now that we all observe a moment of silence for the victims of the attack.


[SILENCE]


Our nation stands together in solidarity with the members of Orlando's LGBT Community.


This is a very dark moment in Americas history.


A radical Islamic terrorist targeted the nightclub not only because he wanted to kill Americans, but in order to execute gay and lesbian citizens because of their sexual orientation.


It is a strike at the heart and soul of who we are as a nation.


It is an assault on the ability of free people to live their lives, love who they want and express their identity.


It is an attack on the right of every single American to live in peace and safety in their own country.


We need to respond to this attack on America as one united people  with force, purpose and determination.


But the current politically correct response cripples our ability to talk and think and act clearly.


If we don't get tough, and we don't get smart  and fast  we're not going to have a country anymore -- there will be nothing left.


The killer, whose name I will not use, or ever say, was born to Afghan parents who immigrated to the United States. His father published support for the Afghan Taliban, a regime which murders those who dont share its radical views. The father even said he was running for President of that country.


The bottom line is that the only reason the killer was in America in the first place was because we allowed his family to come here.


That is a fact, and it's a fact we need to talk about.


We have a dysfunctional immigration system which does not permit us to know who we let into our country, and it does not permit us to protect our citizens.


We have an incompetent administration, and if I am not elected President, that will not change over the next four years -- but it must change, and it must change now.


With fifty people dead, and dozens more wounded, we cannot afford to talk around the issue anymore -- we have to address it head on.


I called for a ban after San Bernardino, and was met with great scorn and anger but now, many are saying I was right to do so -- and although the pause is temporary, we must find out what is going on. The ban will be lifted when we as a nation are in a position to properly and perfectly screen those people coming into our country.


The immigration laws of the United States give the President the power to suspend entry into the country of any class of persons that the President deems detrimental to the interests or security of the United States, as he deems appropriate.


I will use this power to protect the American people. When I am elected, I will suspend immigration from areas of the world when there is a proven history of terrorism against the United States, Europe or our allies, until we understand how to end these threats.


After a full, impartial and long overdue security assessment, we will develop a responsible immigration policy that serves the interests and values of America.


We cannot continue to allow thousands upon thousands of people to pour into our country, many of whom have the same thought process as this savage killer.


Many of the principles of Radical Islam are incompatible with Western values and institutions.


Radical Islam is anti-woman, anti-gay and anti-American.


I refuse to allow America to become a place where gay people, Christian people, and Jewish people, are the targets of persecution and intimidation by Radical Islamic preachers of hate and violence.
Its not just a national security issue. It is a quality of life issue.


If we want to protect the quality of life for all Americans  women and children, gay and straight, Jews and Christians and all people  then we need to tell the truth about Radical Islam.


We need to tell the truth, also, about how Radical Islam is coming to our shores.


We are importing Radical Islamic Terrorism into the West through a failed immigration system -- and through an intelligence community held back by our president.


Even our own FBI Director has admitted that we cannot effectively check the backgrounds of the people we are letting into America.


All of the September 11th hijackers were issued visas.


Large numbers of Somali refugees in Minnesota have tried to join ISIS.


The Boston Bombers came here through political asylum.


The male shooter in San Bernardino  again, whose name I won't mention -- was the child of immigrants from Pakistan, and he brought his wife  the other terrorist - from Saudi Arabia, through another one of our easily exploited visa programs.


Immigration from Afghanistan into the United States has increased nearly five-fold in just one year. According to Pew Research, 99% of people in Afghanistan support oppressive Sharia Law.


We admit many more from other countries in the region who share these same oppressive views.


If we want to remain a free and open society, then we have to control our borders.


Yet, Hillary Clinton  for months and despite so many attacks  repeatedly refused to even say the words "radical Islam," until I challenged her yesterday to say the words or leave the race.


However, Hillary Clinton  who has been forced to say the words today after policies she supports have caused us so much damage  still has no clue what Radical Islam is, and wont speak honestly about what it is.


She is in total denial, and her continuing reluctance to ever name the enemy broadcasts weakness across the world.


In fact, just a few weeks before the San Bernardino slaughter, Hillary Clinton explained her refusal to say the words Radical Islam. Here is what she said: "Muslims are peaceful and tolerant people, and have nothing whatsoever to do with terrorism."


Hillary Clinton says the solution is to ban guns. They tried that in France, which has among the toughest gun laws in the world, and 130 were brutally murdered by Islamic terrorists in cold blood. Her plan is to disarm law-abiding Americans, abolishing the 2nd amendment, and leaving only the bad guys and terrorists with guns. She wants to take away Americans guns, then admit the very people who want to slaughter us.


I will be meeting with the NRA, which has given me their earliest endorsement in a Presidential race, to discuss how to ensure Americans have the means to protect themselves in this age of terror.


The bottom line is that Hillary supports the policies that bring the threat of Radical Islam into America, and allow it to grow overseas.


In fact, Hillary Clintons catastrophic immigration plan will bring vastly more Radical Islamic immigration into this country, threatening not only our security but our way of life.


When it comes to Radical Islamic terrorism, ignorance is not bliss  it's deadly.


The Obama Administration, with the support of Hillary Clinton and others, has also damaged our security by restraining our intelligence-gathering and failing to support law enforcement. They have put political correctness above common sense, above your safety, and above all else.


I refuse to be politically correct.


I will do the right thing--I want to straighten things out and to Make America Great Again.


The days of deadly ignorance will end, and they will end soon.


As President I will give our intelligence community, law enforcement and military the tools they need to prevent terrorist attacks.


We need an intelligence-gathering system second to none. That includes better cooperation between state, local and federal officials  and with our allies.


I will have an Attorney General, a Director of National Intelligence, and a Secretary of Defense who will know how to fight the war on Radical Islamic Terrorism  and who will have the support they require to get the job done.


We also must ensure the American people are provided the information they need to understand the threat.


The Senate Subcommittee on Immigration has already identified hundreds of immigrants charged with terrorist activities inside the United States since September 11th.


Nearly a year ago, the Senate Subcommittee asked President Obama's Departments of Justice, State and Homeland Security to provide the immigration history of all terrorists inside the United States.


These Departments refused to comply.


President Obama must release the full and complete immigration histories of all individuals implicated in terrorist activity of any kind since 9/11.


The public has a right to know how these people got here.


We have to screen applicants to know whether they are affiliated with, or support, radical groups and beliefs.


We have to control the amount of future immigration into this country to prevent large pockets of radicalization from forming inside America.


Even a single individual can be devastating, just look at what happened in Orlando. Can you imagine large groups?


Truly, our President doesn't know what he is doing. He has failed us, and failed us badly, and under his leadership, this situation will not get any better -- it will only get worse.


Each year, the United States permanently admits more than 100,000 immigrants from the Middle East, and many more from Muslim countries outside the Middle East. Our government has been admitting ever-growing numbers, year after year, without any effective plan for our security.


In fact, Clinton's State Department was in charge of the admissions process for people applying to enter from overseas.


Having learned nothing from these attacks, she now plans to massively increase admissions without a screening plan, including a 500% increase in Syrian refugees.


This could be a better, bigger version of the legendary Trojan Horse.


We can't let this happen.


Altogether, under the Clinton plan, you'd be admitting hundreds of thousands of refugees from the Middle East with no system to vet them, or to prevent the radicalization of their children.


The burden is on Hillary Clinton to tell us why she believes immigration from these dangerous countries should be increased without any effective system to screen who we are bringing in.


The burden is on Hillary Clinton to tell us why we should admit anyone into our country who supports violence of any kind against gay and lesbian Americans.


The burden is also on Hillary Clinton to tell us how she will pay for it. Her plan will cost Americans hundreds of billions of dollars long-term.


Wouldn't this money be better spent on rebuilding America for our current population, including the many poor people already living here?


We have to stop the tremendous flow of Syrian refugees into the United States  we don't know who they are, they have no documentation, and we don't know what they're planning.


What I want is common sense. I want a mainstream immigration policy that promotes American values.


That is the choice I put before the American people: a mainstream immigration policy designed to benefit America, or Hillary Clinton's radical immigration policy designed to benefit politically-correct special interests.


We've got to get smart, and tough, and vigilant, and we've got to do it now, because later is too late.


The media talks about "homegrown," terrorism, but Islamic radicalism, and the networks that nurture it, are imports from overseas.


Yes, there are many radicalized people already inside our country as a result of the poor policies of the past. But the whole point is that it will be much, much easier to deal with our current problem if we dont keep on bringing in people who add to the problem.


For instance, the controversial Mosque attended by the Boston Bombers had as its founder an immigrant from overseas charged in an assassination plot.


This shooter in Orlando was the child of an immigrant father who supported one of the most repressive regimes on Earth. Why would we admit people who support violent hatred?


Hillary Clinton can never claim to be a friend of the gay community as long as she continues to support immigration policies that bring Islamic extremists to our country who suppress women, gays and anyone who doesnt share their views.


She cant have it both ways. She cant claim to be supportive of these communities while trying to increase the number of people coming in who want to oppress them.


How does this kind of immigration make our life better? How does this kind of immigration make our country better?


Why does Hillary Clinton want to bring people herein vast numberswho reject our values?


Ask yourself, who is really the friend of women and the LGBT community, Donald Trump with his actions, or Hillary Clinton with her words? Clinton wants to allow Radical Islamic terrorists to pour into our countrythey enslave women, and murder gays.


I dont want them in our country.


Immigration is a privilege, and we should not let anyone into this country who doesnt support our communities  all of our communities.


America has already admitted four times more immigrants than any country on earth, and we continue to admit millions more with no real checks or scrutiny.


Not surprisingly, wages for our workers havent budged in many years.


So whether its matter of national security, or financial security, we cant afford to keep on going like this. We owe $19 trillion in debt, and no longer have options.


All our communities, from all backgrounds, are ready for some relief. This is not an act of offense against anyone; it is an act of defense.


I want us all to work together, including in partnership with our Muslim communities. But Muslim communities must cooperate with law enforcement and turn in the people who they know are bad  and they do know where they are.


I want to fix our schools, roads, bridges and job market. I want every American to succeed. Hillary Clinton wants to empty out the Treasury to bring people into the country that include individuals who preach hate against our own citizens.


I want to protect our citizens  all of our citizens.


The terrorist attack on the Pulse Night Club demands a full and complete investigation into every aspect of the assault.


In San Bernardino, as an example, people knew what was going on, but they used the excuse of racial profiling for not reporting it.


We need to know what the killer discussed with his relatives, parents, friends and associates.


We need to know if he was affiliated with any radical Mosques or radical activists and what, if any, is their immigration status.


We need to know if he travelled anywhere, and who he travelled with.


We need to make sure every single last person involved in this plan  including anyone who knew something but didn't tell us  is brought to justice.


If it can be proven that somebody had information about any attack, and did not give this information to authorities, they must serve prison time .


America must do more  much more  to protect its citizens, especially people who are potential victims of crimes based on their backgrounds or sexual orientations.


It also means we must change our foreign policy.


The decision to overthrow the regime in Libya, then pushing for the overthrow of the regime in Syria, among other things, without plans for the day after, have created space for ISIS to expand and grow.


These actions, along with our disastrous Iran deal, have also reduced our ability to work in partnership with our Muslim allies in the region.


That is why our new goal must be to defeat Islamic terrorism, not nation-building.


For instance, the last major NATO mission was Hillary Clinton's war in Libya. That mission helped unleash ISIS on a new continent.


I've said NATO needs to change its focus to stopping terrorism. Since I've raised that criticism, NATO has since announced a new initiative focused on just that.


America must unite the whole civilized world in the fight against Islamic terrorism, just like we did against communism in the Cold War.


We've tried it President Obama's way. He gave the world his apology tour, we got ISIS, and many other problems, in return.


I'd like to conclude my remarks today by again expressing our solidarity with the people of Orlando who have come under attack.


When I am President, I pledge to protect and defend all Americans who live inside of our borders. Wherever they come from, wherever they were born, all Americans living here and following our laws will be protected.


America will be a tolerant and open society.


America will also be a safe society.


We will protect our borders at home.


We will defeat ISIS overseas.


We will ensure every parent can raise their children in peace and safety.


We will make America rich again.


We will make America safe again.


We will make American Great Again.


Thank you.


...Were doing really well. Iowas been amazing. Its been amazing. Were doing so well and I love this place and Im back here all the time and Im going to be here a lot in January.
Youre going to be so sick of me. Youll probably say, "We cant give  the caucus, just forget it. We cant stand the guy any more."
No, youre going to like me and were going to be back and were going to do a great job for you. Most importantly, were going to get to that office and were going to do the right thing. Were going to do the right thing.
So, a few things. A lot  so much has happened.
You know, when we first came out, we were all talking together. And we were talking border security, which were just doing so great with the border security.
Were going to build a wall. Mexicos going to pay for the wall. We all know that. But were going to have security. And the drugs are going to stop and the people that are going to come into the country but theyre going to come into the country theyre going to be legal, theyre coming in legally, and thats the way. Thats the way.
And it affects Iowa so much.
So we were talking about. So we were talking about that. We were talking about repealing Obamacare. Boom. Its going to be repealed. Its going to be replaced.
I dont know if youve been seeing whats happening but Obamacare is a total disaster. Its dying of its own weight.
And by 17, meaning hell be playing golf and Ill be working very hard. But 17 instead youre not getting the people signed up. Theres been a lot of talk about it and a lot of stories about it.
Obamacares dead but well terminate it quicker than that.
And we will come up with something that will be so good, so much better.
Premiums are going through the roof. Deductibles are so high that unless youre close to death, youll never going to get to use. And even then I dont think youre going to get to use it really.
So, were going to take care of that.
And by the way, we have a lot of good people. We have ethanol. Nobody is really  we have the ethanol  where are the ethanol people? Right?
I was here a month ago and I met with them all and they do a fantastic job. I toured the plants and they do a fantastic job but its so important. And its another form of lets stay away from OPEC and lets stay away from that Middle East stuff. Its so important...
Actually what I dont understand because the one guy thats doing pretty good with me in Iowa is Ted Cruz and hes a nice guy. I mean, everything I say he agrees with me. No matter what I say.
I was going to do one really wild but he agrees.
But with the ethanol, really, hes got to come a long way because hes right now for the oil.
But I understand it. Oil pays him a lot of money. Hes got to be for oil, right? The oil companies give him a lot of money.
But Im with you. Im with everybody. Look, Im self funding. I have no oil company. I have no special interest. I have no lobbyist that want me and you know, theyre representing countries that are ripping off the country, theyre representing companies that are ripping off our country.
All I do is Im going to be working for you folks. Were going to do this thing together. Were going to make America so great again and maybe better than ever before. So important.
So when we first started, I talked about China how theyre ripping us and Japan and Mexico.
Mexico both at the border and in trade. Theyre taking so many of our companies. Nabiscos moving there with their big plant. Ford is moving there with a big plant. They took a big plant away from Tennessee  a great state  they took it away at the last moment.
Im not going to let that stuff. Were going to do what we have to do, okay?
But I talked about that...and I talk about it a lot. The fact is that about 2.5 weeks ago with Paris, Im speaking a little bit differently now.


Believe me, I can take care of China in my back pocket. Thats easy for me. Thats what I do.
And we have all the cards. A lot of people dont know. You know, these politicians they dont understand we have the cards.
You know, with China, our people pay tax. They pay no tax. Its not supposed to be that way. They call it a tariff because it sounds better. But well take care of that. Well take care of all of that.
What happened is with Paris, theres a different mindset.
And when the polls came out last week, my numbers went way up because people felt more secure with me.
Now, maybe it had to do  who knows why? Who knows?
But my poll numbers went up. And do you ever notice whenever theres something that I do thats proper but controversial, theyd say "Oh, now hes gone. Thats it. Thats the end."
I wont go over all of the different things because maybe youll change your minds.
But theyd say, "Thats it. Its over."
And then theyd come in, "Sir, your poll number went up 9 points this week." I said, "They did?" Because I have to do whats right. I have to do whats right.
And you know what? If I dont make it, I dont make it.
I have a good life. We all hopefully have a good life. I have a great family, nice people, wonderful people. They love me. I think. I hope. I think. But I have a great family and I built a great business.
...Theres such spirit...Theres such spirit no matter where I go. You know, I go to Dallas. We have 20,000. 35,000 people in Mobile, Alabama. 20,000 people in Oklahoma. Wherever we go in Iowa, we have these crowds. You know this is supposed to be...for like a record.
It is big and yet it feels intimate. It feels good...
...So I changed a couple of weeks ago. When I saw Paris I changed. And a big, big part of what Im doing now is safety and security and smartness and smartness.
Sort of interesting. You know, the slogan is "Make America Great Again" and Im adding "Make America Great Again and Safe Again" because we dont feel safe anymore.
And the problem we have now that weve never had to this extent is the power of weaponry. Its the power. Its the tremendous power.
You know, 100 years ago, I would have said "Lets not go." I said "Dont go there" anyway. And I said it strongly "Dont go. Youre going to destabilize the Middle East."
But the fact is right now, were going to have to do things because we have some really, really sick degenerates.
And the press  look at all those cameras going all live, all  you know, nobody else has cameras like this. They can make a speech 100 times they make a speech, nobody cares. Look at this.
And dont worry, they never pan the crowd. You know, they never; they have me. Thats why Im walking around. I figured Ill walk around maybe theyll get the crowd. They never pan the crowd. I tell them "Pan the crowd", they never do.
...I had a crowd 7,000 people last week. More. 7,000 people and in a confined space. They had 3,000 people outside that couldnt get in. My wife says, "Darling, the speech was excellent. Did you have many people there?" I said "What?" She said, "Well, they never leave your face." They keep it purposely. But Ill tell you the cameras may be a little screwed up where you cant move them, right?
But every time theres a protester "Well, Im protesting" and it can be in the back lefthand corner of the room, the cameras swoop over there. Its true. Its true. Its true.
No, I used to think they couldnt move. You know, maybe theres something with the crazy computers.
You know, in the old days everything was better right? The car seats. Youd sit in your car and you want to move forward and back, you press a button. Bing, bing. Now, you have to open up things, press a computer, takes you 15 minutes.
Well, the same thing I figured with cameras. I didnt think they moved. I figured they were fixed for certain reasons. And then I saw a protester and those cameras were bent in positions like you wouldnt believe possible.
So, theyre very dishonest people. What can I say? Not all of them but most of them.


Ill tell you, you have one of the most dishonest right here in your backyard. The Des Moines Register is the worst. They are the worst. The worst. No, theyre very dishonest.
You have some reporter named Jacobs. She is the worst. She will write  so  its such misrepresentation. And so I dont care. I mean, who cares? So Im saying it right in their backyard. Theyre failing anyway. They probably wont be in business in two years. I think theyre losing a fortune. I think.
You know, its funny. Every time the Des Moines Register does a poll, I always do badly.
...Im only doing this so they dont sue me but I dont mind if they do. I hope they sue me because they dont have enough money to sue me. Thats the good thing.
But I believe and I may be wrong  in fact, Ill say Im sure Im wrong but its my opinion that they dont do it properly because you know they poll like 300 or 400 people. Ill explain it...You know, if they lose 20 people in the pocket. "Oh, Trump? Oh, forget that one. Forget that one."
Now, I dont know that they do that. Do you do that, Des Moines Register?
But every time I have a Des Moines Register poll, I do poorly. I also do poorly with the Bloomberg polls. I dont know why.
But we had a great poll come in  CNN last couple of days  where were leading I think by 13 points in Iowa. In Iowa.
And then we have another coming where were doing well.
But I think Des Moines Register has somebody says its coming out sometime. Ill just tell you, watch  "Trump disappears!"
I think were going to do so well. I think were actually going to even do better. You know, were leading in most of the poll. Were leading in every poll.
Except Iowa there was one poll  there was one poll, Monmouth  Id never even heard Monmouth. What the hell is Monmouth? What is Monmouth? Explain it. I dont like Monmouth. You know why I dont like it? Because they always treat me badly also.
But I only like polls that treat me well.
But were doing so well. Nationwide, were leading every poll by tremendous. We just had one in Georgia  44%. 44%. Think of that. Thats 44% with 15 people. Id take 44% if we had three people. I dont think Id take it if we had two people but I think Id take if we had three. But 44%.
CBS came out as you know, you probably saw that, New York Times two days ago and were at 35% to a small number. Were killing everybody in every poll. Just one little outlier here.
...Again, Im sure when Des Moines comes out itll be a negative because I dont believe that poll.
But we are going to win. And Ill tell you what. Honestly, Iowa is so important to me. I could say, "Oh, lets not do"  I am an evangelical. I am a Christian. Im a Presbyterian. Im a Presbyterian. I love Billy Graham.
Franklin Graham came out with the most beautiful statements. Franklin Graham. He was so incredible. He came out  I dont know if you all saw the statements he came out with about Trump...He was so incredible. Franklin Graham was amazing, the son of Billy Graham, who was, you know, theres nobody, nobody that Ive ever seen  Billy Graham was unbelievable. If anybodys gone to his crusades, they were incredible.
But so I think were going to do  were doing really well with the evangelicals...
And by the way and again, I do like Ted Cruz but not a lot of evangelicals come out of Cuba in all fairness. Its true. Not a lot come out. But I like him nevertheless.
I think were going to do great and we are doing great with evangelicals. Were doing great with the Tea Party, leading with the Tea Party.
And were doing fantastic with all the young and middle. Were doing great with everybody.
And so its very important for me to win Iowa.


Now, I could put less pressure on myself and I could say, "Oh, I dont care about Iowa. I dont care." But I do care. I do care so much about it. Thats why were here all the time.
And then the lies happened. You know, when I was using Iowa, they lied so much. I said, "The people of Iowa cant be that stupid or the people of the country cant  ". Im trying to make a point, right? So I said, "The people of the country cant be that stupid." Well, they cut the "country" out so its referring to Iowa.
I love you people. Remember that. Remember that.
I was talking about something, and I wont even mention what Im talking about because the guy Im talking about and was actually a very good guy.
But I will say this. We want to win Iowa so bad. Because if I win Iowa, I think wed run the table. I really do. I think wed run the table. Wed go right through.
Because were leading big in New Hampshire  every poll. Big. Big in New Hampshire. Christie got an endorsement from this crazy newspaper up there. Its the weirdest deal Ive ever seen.
And you know the paper that was in his state called up and said, "Are you sure about that? Nobody ever called us." They cant believe it. And we can get into that but its irrelevant.
But were leading New Hampshire big. Were leading in South Carolina like monstrous numbers. Were leading...Nevada. Were leading in Texas. Were leading everywhere. Were leading big in Florida.
Now, you have Rubio  nice guy, by the way. You have Rubio and he is a nice guy but youve got to vote. When people put you in a position to be a Senator, youve got to go and vote. You cant be the number one person that doesnt vote in the Senate. Youve got to say, "Hey, Im a young guy. I want to go and vote." You should stay there a little longer. Hes a good guy. Stay there, go in, vote, create a nice record.
But I dont know. Hows he doing in Iowa? Not too good. Right? Hes not doing well. Hows Rubio doing? Not good.
I mean, it seems like a two-person race right now...and its an important race to me. So I just want to let you know its very important.
So with all of that, if we win Iowa, a lot of people say wed just go through. I think well win virtually every state in the Union and its over quickly. Over quickly.
...What about the Republican establishment? The establishments got a problem, you know. Its sort of like the fighters. You know, the great champions. Sometimes theyll go into the hometown of a guy theyre fighting and theyll say, "You know, wed never want to get a decision. We go for the knock-out. The knock-out is the knock-out." Because you get a lot of bad decisions. I know a lot about the world of sports, believe me, and they go into a hometown to fight and its a decision and they say, "Uh, were in a problem" and theyd lose the fight that they won. The only way they win the fight definitely  knock out.
So, if we win Iowa, I think were going to win everything after that. So I think its going to show how important Iowa is.
...Ill pledge this to Iowa. Even if I lose, Ill pledge it, okay? I dont think Ive ever said that in my life. If we go and win, Iowas staying right where it is in the chain. Its not moving. You know, theres a big move to move Iowa into a much further back position by the establishment. Folks, I win its not happening, okay? Youre staying right here because its great. Its great.




...Youve been paying into Social Security and Medicare, by the way. Lets put them in. Because Medicare does work. With both, you have tremendous waste, fraud, and abuse. Were going to take care of that. Okay?
But were not going to cut your Social Security and were not cutting your Medicare. Were going to take jobs back from all these countries that are ripping us off. Were going to become a wealthy country again. And were going to be able to save your Social Security.
...I cant believe this number but I read it over  who is the man that told me the number  over 6 million people  I cant believe it  are aged 112 and over are getting Social Security...But I heard it. I read it. A tremendous  like 6 million people are getting Social Security. Theyre dead. Meaning somebody else is picking up...
...The press is going to have to check it because what do I know? But can you imagine, we have 6 million  now, we know theres not 6 million, there may be one. But theres not 6 million.
Anybody in this room 112 or over? Because if they are, I want to shake your hand.
But  so 6 million over 112 years old picking up Social Security and thats the beginning. So theres tremendous waste, fraud, and abuse.
What were going to do is were going to save Medicare. Were going to save Social Security. Were not going to raise the age or were not going to do all the things that everyone else is talking about doing. Theyre all talking about doing it, and you dont have to. Were going to bring our jobs back. Were going to make our economy incredible again.
My tax proposal, which is in, and a great detail in terms of policy and its gotten tremendous reviews from a lot of people, a lot of great groups.
But we are going to cut taxes tremendously for the middle class and for businesses because our middle class is being decimated.
And when that happens, youre going to see an economy that takes off. Were going to get rid of a lot of that debt, if not all of it. But were going to get rid of it  you know, were at $19 trillion going t $21 trillion right.
You know, if you go back eight or nine years, trillion wasnt even a word anybody knew and now its like routine.
So we are going to save your Social Security without cuts. Were going to bring the economy back. Were going to make ourselves rich again.
A woman said to me in New Hampshire recently, she said, "Mr. Trump, Im voting for you. I love you. But its very crude when you say youre going to make our country rich again." I said, "I know its crude. It sounds bad. But many things I say are crude. It sounds bad. But we cant make our country great again unless we make our country rich again. We cant let everybody in the world rip us off.


...We just did a big interview with CNN just before this. And you know, Hillary  was Hillary missing today? What happened? She was two hours late. No, did you hear?
Now, I may be wrong. If Im one minute off, theyll call me because they love Hillary. They love her. You know why. I dont know why. Why? Im trying to figure it. No, I heard she was a couple of hours late. Everybody left. You know what happened? She was sleeping. Im telling you. She couldnt get out of bed. She was sleeping. She was sleeping. Was right.
...




Remember, we built China. The money they took out of country, we rebuilt China. You go there, they have bridges all over the  they have bridges like the George Washington Bridge. Maybe I shouldnt mention that particular bridge. But like bigger like the George Washington Bridge. Only a few people got that one; thats okay.
But they have bridges going up. We have rebuilt China. Theyve taken our jobs. Theyve taken our base. Theyve taken our manufacturing all over the place. Theyve taken our money. Theyve taken our money. Not going to happen anymore folks. Not going to happen anymore. Not going to happen.
I know the great business people. We have the greatest business people in the world. Guys like Carl Icahn. He calls me, "Donald, I want to help. I want to help." The smartest people call. Were not going to use the special interest guy  a donor.
We use donors to negotiate with China because he gave some guy like, you know, whoever it might be. Because again, Im the only one thats self-funding my campaign. Everybody else isnt.
These guys  when these guys give money to politicians to a large extent they own those politicians. They will do whatever the hell the special interests and the donors want.
Thats not going to happen with me.
So, Social Security  were saving it. Medicare  were saving it. Were going to make our country rich. Okay? Thank you, sweetheart.


...Yeah, its called the statute of limitations, right? And you know its a six-year year statute. Maybe five but its probably six. But its a six-year statute. Yeah, you have to look at it.
Look, Hillary Clinton  you know this story. Its a crime. She committed a crime.
Now, perhaps  perhaps  somebody, you know, we have to have a fair Justice Department and perhaps...well have some really good Attorney General thats going to say "Well, you know".
Look, we want to be fair to everybody. Okay? Including Hillary Clinton. But she committed a crime in my opinion.
Now, she shouldnt be allowed to run. Shes being protected absolutely. I have little doubt that theyre going to find anything. But theyve already found it.
I mean, you watch television. You have all these big scholars, these lawyers, "Yes, she violated section so and so". Just one after another. I mean, actually violated many, many laws, not just like a little one here. Many laws.
You mentioned General Petraeus. His life was destroyed over 5% of what Hillary Clinton did. Over nothing.
So I think shes going to be their nominee definitely. The only question is whether or not shell be allowed to run. Shes being protected by the Democrats. Shes being protected by the President. And thats why  why do you think shes going along with these insane policies of his? Okay? I mean, she goes along with everything.
I dont even  honestly in all fairness to her, I dont think she believes it. But I think shes afraid hes going to say, "Listen, I dont like her anymore. Go take care of her. Im going to get somebody else." Im telling you.
So, the question is statute of limitations. Its a five year statute of limitations. Shes got a problem. Shes got a problem. In one way, shes running for her life because I know one thing, if she wins thats the end of that. Right? But if she loses she could have a very serious problem.
...


...Well, I said right at the beginning. Were going to build a wall thats going to be a real wall. Thats going to be a real wall.
Its not going to be  you see that ceiling? That ceiling is nothing compared to the wall. And we can build it and we can build it right. And it will be strong and powerful and as beautiful as a wall is going to look. Its got to be beautiful because someday theyre going to name it the Trump Wall. I know that. Its going to happen. Going to happen.
And its going to work. And walls do work.
You know, they wanted to build a wall here 20 years ago. You know they couldnt get environmental impact statements. Thats just shows you.
China is building in the South China Sea massive military bases. Right? Why? Theyre not supposed to. They have no respect for Obama or our country. Theyre not supposed to be doing that. And you could get them to stop just by saying "Were not doing business with you anymore." Their whole economy would  you dont have to go to war. Its economics. The whole country would collapse in two seconds. Believe me. We have such power and we dont know it.
But theyre building massive  now, they had little islands. They put the biggest escavators, not Caterpillars. I think theyre using Komatsu from Japan...They have these massive escavators, and I said to a friend of mine whos Chinese from China  very rich guy, very successful guy, paid me a fortune for an apartment so I happen to like him, okay?  I said jokingly "How long did it take them to do these massive islands theyre building right out of the sea? Boom, those shovels go in, take out everything. How long did it take you to get the environmental impact statements?" He laughed. He said, "What are you kidding me? Nothing." They say "We will build there." About two seconds later, you have escavators digging.
So we had a problem with environmental  look, Ive won many environmental awards. Im a big believer especially in clean air and clean water. Im a big believer. Just so you know. Big. And Ive gotten so many awards for the environment. So I understand the environment; Ive won many, many awards.
But when you look at how were impinged and hurt. But the wall was stopped because they couldnt get an environmental impact statement among other things. They couldnt get an environmental impact statement.
Now, there was probably a snail or a turtle or a snake or something. You were ruining the habitat of a rattlesnake. I dont know. But they actually had people  a lot of people  people that now would be against it but they wanted to build a wall and years ago they couldnt get it done.
...You know, I said bomb the oil, right? Ive been saying that for three years. Now finally they started  after Paris they started bombing the oil. Ive been saying it for years.
You know one of the reasons we didnt bomb the oil? Obama didnt want to hurt the environment. Now, I heard that and I thought somebody was kidding. I thought a comedian was saying it. It turned out to be true. He didnt want the flames and everything going into the atmosphere. This is the way we fight today.
Im telling you, folks, were being led by stupid people. Were being led by stupid people.
Ive been saying not really bomb  Ive been saying take the oil. I didnt want to go into Iraq. But once we were there, I said "Look, we shouldnt have been there. But then when we left, we left the wrong way."
First of all, we have a president who told them a date. "Were going to leave on such and such a date." What was it like 18 months later? So the enemy all of sudden said, "Wow", cause dont believe it. They dont want to be killed. Okay? They dont want to be killed. So the enemy said "Theyre going to leave on a certain date?" So they pulled back, the date comes, and now you see what happened. Its a disaster and Iran is taking over Iraq.
So anyway, I couldnt believe it when they said that. When we said to our 50 soldiers two weeks ago and our president gets up and announces "We are sending 50 soldiers."
Okay, first of all, he thinks its a good press announcement. Its not. 50 soldiers  thats not a lot even though theyre the elite. But those 50 soldiers because of that announcement have a target on their heart. They have a target on their heart.
Why does he have to say that for? Why cant he let 50 soldiers go there quietly, stealth, stealth? Why cant he just do that? Why cant he do that?
Those 50 soldiers are in grave danger today because of that, and they probably dont even know that but everybody is looking for them and thats the way it is.
We have people that dont know what theyre doing.
We used to have General MacArthur  Douglas MacArthur  General George Patton. I mean, these were real people. These were real people.
Today, we have generals that go on talk shows...I saw a general the other day on a talk show. He said  and this was serious and hes a good man. Theyre good men. But youve got to lead these men. Even the generals have to have some power over them. He said, "We are in the worst shape in terms of preparedness that weve been in in decades." And this is the time when we have to be in the best shape because the world wants to kill us.
And he said we are in the worst shape weve been in many, many decades.
Now, number one, he shouldnt be saying that because youre telling the enemy that and the enemy feels embolden when they hear that. Right? We shouldnt be saying it. We shouldnt be saying it.
I mean, even if its true, you dont say it. You get it fixed and you do the opposite.
One thing Im going to do Ill tell you, Im going to build our military so big and so strong and so powerful  so powerful that nobody is going to mess with us. Nobody is going to mess with us.
You know in many ways, its the cheapest thing you can do. Everyone is toying with us right now. Its the cheapest thing you can do. The absolute cheapest thing you can do.


...Im a big Second Amendment person by the way.
...My sons are really great marksmen. Theyre big believers. And Im a member of the NRA but Im not such a good shot. But theyre great shots so its one of those things.
But if you think about that question. So you know theres tremendous pressure to get rid of the guns, get rid of the magazines, no bullets. How about the one where they have three bullets in every magazine? ...So the people will put three bullets in. I dont think the bad guys are going to say, "Well, I dont want to break the law. Im going to go kill people today but Im going to put three bullets in." Right?
These people  and you know I have arguments with them all the time and Im a practical guy. Honestly, if I didnt believe this, I couldnt say it.
So in France or in California, I have a permission to carry, which is a big thing in New York. Its very hard to get. I have a license to carry.
But in France or in California or in all these places where we see the shooters, right, if instead of having like in France hundreds of people in that room  Paris has the toughest gun laws in the world. France has the toughest gun laws in the world. Nobody has guns. Except the bad guys.
So they walk in with the worst, the toughest, the best weaponry you could have and they said, "Over here  boom. Over here  boom." So they killed 128 but many more are dying right now. Theyre in terrible shape in the hospitals. They just wipe the place out and they couldve stayed there for longer. They wiped it out.
Then you had those two sleaze bags from California. The married couple. I saw the press  "The young married couple that did the shooting". Theyre not a young married couple. Theyre the worst. Theyre sleaze.
...They say "The young married couple". Thats no young married couple.
So they walk into a place and they killed 14 people and others are going to be dying probably because of a lot of other wounded people.
But if somebody had guns in there  nobody had a gun...How would you have done if you had a gun? Would you have been firing back a little bit? Theyd been in trouble. Right? They would have been in trouble. Believe me. That guy.
So, you know, I went to like an Ivy League college and I have a lot of friends that are against guns and I argue with them. I talk to them. I said, "Okay, were in Paris. You have all these places and theres hundreds of people. Guys walk in with guns and you have no gun. Dont you think they wouldve been better if they had?" They cant  they lose the argument but they never change their mind.
So we have to fight for the Second Amendment. Its so simple. Its so simple.
And believe me, believe me, they want to take those guns away and you always know that the bad ones are going to have the guns and theyre going to have them more so than ever before. So were going to protect the Second Amendment if Im president. That I can tell you.
And by the way, were going to be saying Merry Christmas again. Do you ever notice?
...And by the way, Merry Christmas everybody. Merry Christmas. And happy holiday.
Frankly, I have a lot of friends that arent Christian. They like Christmas. Everybody likes Christmas. Its politically incorrect to say Merry Christmas. But when Im president, Merry Christmas, Happy Holidays, enjoy yourselves, dont eat too much turkey. Right?
Okay, so were going to say Merry Christmas again folks. Were going to bring that spirit back.


...I really do. I like Ted Cruz a lot. And hes doing well. Im doing well. I mean, its not a contest between the two of us, just so we understand. We have to make that  but I do like him.
And I would say that we would certainly have things in mind for Ted, to be honest with you.
I mean, hes somebody that I can certainly see that because I like him, he likes me. He actually put out a tweet tonight. He said "Donald Trump is"  I think he used the word  "terrific". Thats a nice word. I mean, whoever hears that?
I can tell you other candidates are not exactly saying that about me. Right?
...


...So the Super PACs are horrible and I had many set up for me by people I didnt know. I mean, Id see them on television talking about  somebody named one "The Art of the Deal PAC". Two young guys. They look good. I mean, I dont know.
But then I got to be, you know, started going around and I see the corruption with these Super PACs, with the stuff towards money. People that put the money in are dealing with the candidates. The whole thing is wrong.
And I see it. I mean, Bush has $125 million. Think of it. $125 million. By the way, if he had $2 billion it wouldnt make any difference. Okay?
But Bush has $125 million. And honestly, hes a nice person. He is. I dont want to do that but hes a very nice person. But its $125 million. And youd say to yourself, "People give $2 million, $5 million, $7 million. You know whats happening."
But some of the Super PACs are running campaigns. Theyre actually running the campaign.
Another thing and its sort of interesting, one of the Super PACs I believe has $6 million. Of the $6 million  this was reported on the front page of the Los Angeles Times  one of the candidates whos a nice person so Im not going to mention the name. You know, when I like people I like them. Im a very loyal person.
Of the $6 million after all of the bloodsuckers took their cuts, the fundraisers  can you believe this?  they had $140,000 left for the campaign. Thats better than being a real estate broker. Id rather do that than sell houses. $140,000 left. That was in the newspaper. I dont know. I think I believe it.
But Ive seen it. I saw it with the Romney campaign. Guys made tens of millions of dollars raising money for Romney. I said what the hell is this? I mean, you give money and they get a cut.
Look, our laws are so corrupt. Our campaign finance laws are so totally corrupt. Its so horrible. So horrible.
And I dont necessarily want to stop people from giving because I think thats a good thing but you have to get away from these PACs.
What you have to have is people have to know who it is. So you have to open up the process. Let people know. If somebody wants to give $1 million, you give $1 million but everybody has to know that so and so gave $1 million because that puts a little pressure on guys like Brad who raises hundreds of millions. Puts a little pressure.
But the concept of the PAC is no good. Its no good. Its a very dangerous, terrible thing. So we will change our laws because you really have no choice. Its so out of control. Its so terrible.
But the papers that are in this room tonight, they should look at this. Theres so little money left over for the candidates, its one of the reasons why Im so happy Im doing my own.
We actually sent legal letters to either nine or 11 PACs. The Trump PAC, the Trump PAC, the this PAC. First of all, Im sure that out of some of them they stole the money. Some guy has no money. He sets up a Trump something PAC. Nothing to do with me. Sets it up. All of a sudden hes got $2 million sitting there. Right? People send in money. And that guy has no money. How much of that money do you think hes going to use to do what hes supposed to be doing? Thats common sense. So maybe all of it but I doubt it.
So we sent legal notices to every one that we could find. We dont want their money. We said "Dont do it. We dont want it. And we want ideally to give the money back to the people that gave it to you."
But the Super PAC concept is corrupt. Its terrible and it should be ended. And were going to go to new campaign finance laws that are going to be terrific. Okay? Thank you.


...Well, look hes [referring to Cruz] from Texas. To the best of my knowledge, theres a lot of oil in Texas. Right? So you know, he gets a lot of money from the oil companies and hes totally against ethanol and everything else youre talking about.
And Im not. Im totally in favor.
And you know, its a big industry here. Its a big industry.
You know, if that industry is upset, Iowas got problems.
I was amazed. I was here three weeks ago with the group...They were such amazing people...And I learned so much about it. I was in favor of it even before...
...Beyond even the fuel capacities, which we want to create as much as we can, tremendous numbers of jobs in Iowa. And I said to myself, if Ted Cruz is against ethanol, how does he win in Iowa? Because thats very anti-Iowa. I dont know how he wins in Iowa. I dont know.
No, but Im totally for it. Okay? Thank you.


...I was a member of the establishment six months ago. I gave $350,000 to the RGA. Thats the Republican Governors Association. I gave tremendous amounts of money away. I was like the fair haired boy.
Once I said Im running, they said "What? Youre not supposed to run."
And then what happened  I ran against all these Senators and Governors. And everyone said "Well, I dont know." My wife said "If you run, youre going to win" because she understands that I like people  I love people and people love me. And she said "You will run but you actually have to go and run. You have to announce youre running because nobodys going to believe youre running."
And so I didnt want to announce because I didnt want to like announce and things didnt work out and Im like some of these guys where theyre zero. Many of them zero.
And so finally I said, "Look, lets  were going to do it. We have to do it."
Just too many things that I watch on television with our president and the decisions that are made  Bergdahl  where we get Bergdahl and they get five killers. We get this horrible, dirty rotten spy  horrible traitor. We get this horrible, terrible traitor and they get five killers that theyve wanted for nine years  the worst killers  and theyre all back on the battlefield.
You know, so many decisions. The Iran deal. The Iran deal. How bad is that? They self-inspect. "Okay, good. Were not building. We promise were not building nuclear weapons." "Oh, okay. Thats okay."
And we give them $150 billion and we dont even get our prisoners back. The whole thing is crazy. So I saw this. And I said to my wife, "Hey, I dont know if Ill do well or not. Who the hell knows?"
And its a risky thing. And Ive always heard if youre a very successful person you cant run for office, especially for president, and I see it all the time. And the people go after me. I dont even care at this point. I said, "I have to do it. Now, were going to have to do it."
And I look at it last time with Romney and I didnt do it and I probably should have because he let us down. I mean, look, he let us down.
That was an election  we had a failed president. Four years ago he was a failed president, just as bad as he is now. Its true. And Romney let us down. That last month  it was like he wasnt even campaigning.
I said, "Why arent you on Jay Leno? Why arent you on David Letterman? Why arent you doing it?" And he just didnt do it. So he lost the election.
So I backed McCain, he lost. I backed Romney, he lost. This time I said Im doing it myself, okay? Were going to win. Were going to win.
But there is an establishment out there. Its a real establishment. Real people. And theyre people that are used to having their little puppets all over the place. And theyre people that are used to giving donations and having control.
And theyre people that, you know, look when they call me Ill treat them with respect but Im not going to be doing bad things if its bad for the country. Im not going to let Ford build a plant in Mexico if I can keep it in Michigan.
And Im not going to let the car companies and Nabisco and all these people and all these companies  Im all for free trade. I think its great. Im for it. But its got to be smart trade. Im not going to let them move to Mexico and then sell stuff over the border with no tax, no nothing so we lose our jobs, we lose our factories, they go over here, they make it, we let them come through. How does that help us, folks? I went to the best business school in the world. Believe me, it doesnt help us. Okay? Trust me.
And were not going to make deals like that anymore. We cant. We owe $19 trillion. We cant.
So the establishment is not ever probably  look, you know what? In the end, if this country starts humming even the establishment theyll be saying "Okay, its a good thing" because theyll be beneficiaries also.
But we do have a real establishment and theyve never seen this happen before.
A writer called up and he said recently  I told this story. I mean, one of the top journalists to my way of thinking certainly in the country and beyond. And he said, "Mr. Trump, how does it feel?" I said, "How does what feel?" "How does it feel? What youve done has never, ever been done before?" I said, "What have I done?" "Youve dominated the Summer of Trump." Now they call it the Autumn of Trump.
Hopefully, theyre going to call it the Spring of Trump and I want the next Autumn of Trump.
But I said to the writer, "I dont know what youre talking about. I havent done anything cause frankly if I dont win I consider this to be a total waste of time." Ill be honest with you. As much as I like being with you tonight. Because we wont be able to do anything.
He said, "No, no. Youve won even if you dont win. Youve won already." I said, "No, youre wrong. If I dont win, I have wasted my time."
So you know, the point is that the establishment cant believe it because theyve never seen it happen before.
...I was on the cover of Time Magazine four or five weeks ago and Time Magazine was going to pick the Person of the Year. Everybody  even my enemies  said "Trump is going to win." I said, "I wont win." They said, "Why?" "I wont win. Just like I should have gotten the Emmy for The Apprentice for the first three years. I was nominated. I should have." And I said, "Ill never win." I told everybody Ill never win because Im not Hollywood establishment.
And with Time Magazine, I said  Bill OReilly, whos a great guy, did an editorial at the end of his show two days ago saying nobody has done more than Trump, he should have won.
Now, Im not saying I should have  yeah, I probably should have in all fairness  but he said "Nobodys done more"  you know, taking over  what weve done has been amazing  all of us together not just me. Its all of us. Its all of us. From Dallas and Mobile and Oklahoma. All of us. Because the spirit.
...Well, Merkel got it. Now, Merkel, what did she do? Shes destroyed  I mean, shes in the process of destroying Germany with the migration.
We have to help the people with the migration. We have to create a safe zone some place in Syria. But I dont want them coming into this country. I dont want them because we dont know who they are. We dont know who they are. Them with their printing press that now do the forged passports. Okay? You heard about that. So we dont know.
The bottom line on that  its such an interesting question. Youll know in about a month or two whether or not the establishment has treated me fairly.
But the only thing I can say is this: If I win Iowa, I think its over. I said before. Because I think if I win Iowa, New Hampshire is amazing. People are amazing. You would love the people. They would love you. Youd love everybody. The whole country is in love...I call it the noisy majority. Its no longer a silent majority. Its the noisy majority.
But if we win like I think were going to win because we have such a big league, honestly, its not going to matter. They cant do anything. I dont care about the establishment. They cant do anything.
You know, the only way they can do is if Im a little bit short, if Im two votes short I have a problem because Ill have to go into that convention, Im dealing with all these blood sucker politicians and theyll make their deals and theyll have all their money guys around and theyll be in the backroom making deals.
But if I get the number of delegates, theres not a thing they can do. And Ill end up doing fine with the establishment...


...Im such a believer in education.
You know, I had an uncle who was a professor at MIT who was a brilliant guy...In fact, I just retweeted an article about him today. Youve got to read it. Okay? @RealDonaldTrump. You have to read it.
When I see somebody like Jeb  no Ill tell you one thing I respect. He didnt change his views. He knew he was getting killed on this issue and he didnt change. And I respect that to a certain extent. But its so wrong.
Common Core is a total disaster. We have people  bureaucrats in Washington  telling you how your child should be educated in Iowa and New Hampshire and all of the different places that we go to. Its ridiculous.
And I go around and Ive seen the principals. Ive seen so many students and teachers and professors and principals, and Ive seen some of the people and the love  even in Iowa at a school  Ive seen some of the love these parents give to those schools. This is real love. These are smart people. And these are people that arent working for a paycheck. These are incredible people...
Remember this: Our educational system is a mess. We spend more money per pupil as a government than any other country in the world and were in 28th place. And I mean like double what anybody else pays.
So I want to bring education back to the local areas. Youre going to have parents and youre going to have unbelievably talented people and they love their kids and they want their kids to be well-educated because its so important. And youre going to be very happy with it. Okay? Thank you. Thank you.


...You people do it. Were backing you 100%...We are backing you 100%. Youre doing a phenomenal job. There should be more people like you in this country.
You know, the whole grid is a disaster. Right? The whole country. The infrastructure of our country is falling apart.
And nobody can build like me. Its what I do. I build. I build.
Im building on  as you know  Pennsylvania Avenue a big tremendous hotel that I got from the government of the United States. Can you believe it? During the Obama administration a couple of years ago.
But we had the best plan. The GSA is terrific. Theyre very good. Actually, theyre very talented people.
Were under-budget and ahead of schedule. Thats what we do.
When you see these things where theyre building a bridge and its going to cost, you know, $1 billion and it costs $12 billion. How about when they build a hospital and it costs $3 billion?
And I look at it  Im very good  I can look at a building and tell you how much its going to cost.
I say "$250 million." "No, sir, $3 billion." $3 billion? Think somebody got rich on that one?
So were going to stop all this stuff. Were going to make our country so strong and so wonderful. And we all love it anyways. We love it.
But its so sad to see whats happening. Its so sad. And were going to change it around.


...We have such a problem. And the biggest problem I have, you know, it relates to education and the hardest thing you get is when you go around and youd see students and so many students come out to hear us and they always want to talk about the loans  they have student loans  and theyre going through nice colleges, theyre good students, they work hard, they could be really top in their class and they get out and they say, "Mr. Trump, we have no jobs. We cant get jobs."
So theyre borrowed up to the hilt and they cant get jobs.
Were going to bring our jobs back from China. Were going to bring our jobs back from all these places overseas that have stolen our jobs.
Were going to bring our jobs back from South America. Were bringing them back from Mexico. Were going to have jobs again. Believe me. Were going to be manufacturers again.
Were going to start making Apple computers in this country. What the hell good does it do to make them in China? I want to make them in this country and we have the ability to do it.
So, were going to bring our jobs back. Okay?


Wow! Thank you very much.
Hello.
Id like to begin by thanking the people of Montana, South Dakota, New Mexico, New Jersey, and California. We had some big, big days and we have some big numbers coming in. Very big numbers.
Im truly honored by your support.
Together, we accomplished what nobody thought was absolutely possible and you know what that is. Were only getting started and its going to be beautiful. Remember that.
Tonight, we close one chapter in history and we begin another. Our campaign received more primary votes than any GOP campaign in history. No matter who it is, no matter who they are, we received more votes.
This is a great feeling. Thats a great feeling.
This is not a testament to me but a testament to all of the people who believed real change, not Obama change, but real change is possible.
Youve given me the honor to lead the Republican Party to victory this fall.
Were going to do it. Were going to do it, folks. Were going to do it.
I understand the responsibility of carrying the mantle and I will never, ever let you down. Too much work, too many people, blood, sweat, and tears. Im never going to let you down.
I will make you proud of your party and our movement, and thats what it is  its a movement.
Now, recent polls have shown that Im beating Hillary Clinton and with all of her many problems and the tremendous mistakes that shes made and she has made tremendous mistakes, we expect our lead to continue to grow and grow substantially.
To everyone who voted for me throughout this campaign, I want to thank you. I want to thank you very, very much.
To those who voted for someone else in either party, I will work hard to earn your support and I will work very hard to earn that support.
To all of those Bernie Sanders voters who have been left out in the cold by a rigged system of super delegates, we welcome you with open arms.


And by the way, the terrible trade deals that Bernie was so vehemently against  and hes right on that  will be taken care of far better than anyone ever thought possible. And thats what I do.
We are going to have fantastic trade deals. Were going to start making money and bringing in jobs.
Now, I know some people say Im too much of a fighter. My preference is always peace, however. And Ive shown that. Ive shown that for a long time.
Ive built an extraordinary business on relationships and deals that benefit all parties involved  always.
My goal is always again to bring people together. But Im forced to fight for something I really care about, I will never, ever back down and our country will never, ever back down.
Ive fought for my family. Ive fought for my business. Ive fought for my employees. And now Im going to fight for you  the American people  like nobody has ever fought before.
And Im not a politician fighting. Im me. Youre going to see some real good things happen.
Just remember this: Im going to be your champion. Im going to be Americas champion.
Because, you see, this election isnt about Republican or Democrat. Its about who runs this country  the special interests or the people  and I mean the American people.
Every election year politicians promised change. Obama promised change and it didnt work out too well. And every year, they failed to deliver.
Why would politicians want to change a system thats totally rigged in order to keep them in power? Thats what theyre doing, folks.
Why would politicians want to change a system thats made them and their friends very, very wealthy?
I beat a rigged system by winning with overwhelming support  the only way you could have done it  landslides all over the country with every demographic, on track to win 37 primary/caucus victories in a field that began with 17 very talented people.


After years of disappointment, theres one thing we all have learned  we cant fix the rigged system by relying on very  and I mean this so, so strongly  on the very people who rigged it. And they rigged it and do not ever think anything differently.
We cant solve our problems by counting on the politicians who created our problems.
The Clintons have turned the politics of personal enrichment into an art form for themselves.
Theyve made hundreds of millions of dollars selling access, selling favors, selling government contracts, and I mean hundreds of millions of dollars.
Secretary Clinton even did all of the work on a totally illegal private server. Something that how shes getting away with this folks nobody understands. Designed to keep her corrupt dealings out of the public record, putting the security of the entire country at risk, and a president in a corrupt system is totally protecting her. Not right.
I am going to give a major speech on probably Monday of next week, and were going to be discussing all of the things that have taken place with the Clintons. I think youre going to find it very informative and very, very interesting.
I wonder if the press would want to attend. Who knows?
Hillary Clinton turned the State Department into a private hedge fund. The Russians, the Saudis, the Chinese all gave money to Bill and Hillary and got favorable treatment in return.
Its a sad day in America when foreign governments with deep pockets have more influence in our own country than our great citizens.
I didnt need to do this. Its not easy. Believe me. I didnt need to do it. But I felt I had to give back to our wonderful country, which has been so good to me and to my family.


Ive traveled to many of our states and seen the suffering in peoples lives.
Ive visited communities in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Indiana, and Ohio whose manufacturing jobs  they literally these jobs have virtually disappeared. An embarrassment to our country and its horrible.
Ive embraced the victims of illegal immigration  moms and dads who have had to bury their own children because of people that shouldnt have been in the country. Remember it, folks. Remember it.
Ive visited the crumbling cities and the struggling schools.
Ive seen our dilapidated airports, highways, bridges, and Ive compared them to other countries where we see facilities so far superior to ours. Its really not to be believed. Hard to imagine whats happened to our country.
America is getting taken apart piece by piece, auctioned off, and just rapidly auctioned off to the highest bidder.
Were broke. Were broke. We owe $19 trillion. Going quickly to $21 trillion.
Our infrastructure is a disaster. Our schools are failing. Crime is rising. People are scared.
The last thing we need is Hillary Clinton in the White House or an extension of the Obama disaster.
What a crowd. What a crowd. Thank you all very much. We love our country. We love our country.
But we can turn this all around. Were going to do it by putting America first.
That commitment is the foundation for change thats been missing and its been missing for a long time.


Its important to understand what America First means.
It means on foreign policy, we will never enter into any conflict unless it makes us safer as a nation. It has to make us safer as a nation.
This is the opposite of Hillarys foreign policy, which invaded Libya, destabilized Iraq, unleashed ISIS and threw Syria into chaos and created the mass migration, which is wrecking havoc all over the world and while putting Iran on the path to nuclear weapons and making them a dominant power in the Middle East. And they are dominant and we have made them that way, folks, we have made them that way.
Better hope Im president.
On trade, America First means the American worker will have his or her job protected from unfair foreign competition  whats happening here is absolutely a disgrace.
No PPP [sic]. Youre right about that. So and you mean no PP.
We are going  and remember this  we are only going to have great trade deals. Okay? We are only going to have that.
Were not going to approve as somebody just said the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which is a disaster  a disaster  for our country. Almost as bad as NAFTA signed by Bill Clinton, which has just stripped our country of our factories and our manufacturing and moved them to other places and in particular Mexico.
If its not a great deal for our country, we will not sign it. Its got to be great for our country, for our community, for everybody in here because believe me we are all suffering and were suffering big league and its getting worse.
On energy policy, America First means opening up Americas great potential to bring wealth and prosperity to our own workers, including our wonderful and hardworking miners who have been absolutely totally mistreated by this administration.
On economic policy, America First means having tax and regulatory policies that keep jobs and wealth in the United States, substantially lowering taxes for middle class Americans and businesses. Likewise, regulation which is strangling our economy which would be brought down from its present insane level, we will make it very, very good for our companies, for our small businesses, and for people that want to survive and do well in our country.
On immigration policy, America First means protecting the jobs, wages, and security of American workers. Whether first or tenth generation, no matter who you are, were going to protect your job because let me tell you, our jobs are being stripped from our country like were babies.


The beauty of America First is that it brings us all together. Every American worker of every background is entitled to the same benefits, protections and rights and privileges. Its got to be that way.
Now, the people in charge say things cant change. Im here today to tell you that we have to change. We have no choice. We have to change.
Were going to put America back to work. Were going to make our own products. Were going to put America back to work.
Were going to rebuild our inner cities, which are absolutely a shame and so sad, going to take care of our African-American people that have been mistreated for so long.
Were going to make you and your families safe, secure, and prosperous. Prosperous again.
Together, we will put the American people first again. First again.
We will make our communities wealthy. We will make our cities safe again. We will make our country strong again.
Ladies and gentlemen, we will make America great again! Remember. Thank you!
Thank you! Thank you very much everybody!


Thank you, everybody. Thank you very much. This has been a great period of time. Its been really amazing.
Weve gotten the nomination. Were going to have an incredible period in Cleveland. We look forward to it.
Weve started working already on the convention.
And LeBron, good luck in the series because were going to have the series, which of course the longer it goes the less time we have but thats okay. And its going to be very interesting to see what happens.
But as you know, theyre playing the basketball championships partially in that arena so I think it will be very exciting. Itll add to the excitement in Cleveland and thats good. Thats what we want because its going to be an exciting period of time.
We have  weve done some awfully good work. I was just informed...that weve got more votes than anybody in the history of the Republican primaries and we still have I guess six or seven locations to go, states to go.
And in the history, think of it, in the history of this great party, weve gotten substantially more votes than anybody else by millions  by many millions more  than anybody whos ever run.
So thats a great. You know, when you think Dwight Eisenhower and Ronald Reagan and everybody, we have the most votes by far. So thats something to me thats very exciting.
And overall, its just been a very exciting process. I think were going to do very well.
We have no idea whats going to happen on the Democrats side but theyre certainly having difficulty. I dont like to see people having difficulty. But if anybody has to have it, let it be them.
And I think its going to be very interesting.
Im very proud to say that weve gotten the most votes and also if you look at the overall primary the amount of votes cast, thats also a record. So weve broken a lot of records in terms of the voters.
Our polling has come out and the polls are doing very well as you know. Were pretty much even and in some cases ahead of Hillary. And I think were going to have a very, very successful number of months. And I think it will all culminate in November and were going to make America great. Okay?
So thats the way it is...






Im glad you asked the question because I have to tell you I have raised a tremendous amount of money for the vets  almost $6 million. And more money is going to come in I believe over the next little while too.
But Ive raised almost $6 million. All of the money has been paid out and Im going to give it to you in just a second.
In fact, I brought a list just in case that question was asked.
But the money has been paid out.
I have been thanked by so many veterans groups throughout the United States.
One gentleman called me up recently crying that out of a blue he got a check for $100,000. I have been thanked by so many groups  great veterans groups.
And by the way, outside you have a few people picketing. Theyre sent there by Hillary Clinton and theyre picketing that the money wasnt sent. The money has all been sent.
I wanted to keep it private. If we could, I wanted to keep it private because I dont think its anybodys business if I want to send money to the vets.
But I have to say this. I raised close to $6 million. Itll probably be over that amount when its all said and done. But as of this moment, its $5.6 million.
When this started, it started with a speech in Iowa when I said lets raise some money for the vets and it went up from $1 million to $2 million to $3 million. And it now ends up to be almost $6 million and again I think we can even do better than that.




But I will say that the press should be ashamed of themselves.
And behalf of the vets, the press should be ashamed of themselves. They are calling me. They are furious because I sent people checks of a lot of money.
Were going to give you the names right now, which is what you want.
And instead of being like "Thank you very much, Mr. Trump" or "Trump did a good job", everyone said, "Who got it? Who got it? Who got it?" And you make me look very bad.
I have never received such bad publicity for doing such a good job.
So I will give the names because thats what you want. Right?
Okay. Are you ready?
I brought them here. It takes  because you have to vet each company. You know, much of this money was paid out fairly early.
But you have to vet all of these different groups because these are many different groups. You have to go through a process. When you send checks for hundreds of thousands of dollars to people and to companies and to groups that youve never heard of  charitable organizations. You have to vet it. You send people out. You do a lot of work.
Now, most of the money went out quite a while ago. Some of it went out more recently. But all of this has gone out and Ill give you the names.
Are you ready? Do you have your pad?
And again, I really think the press  look, the media, you know my opinion of the media. Its very low. I think the media is frankly made up of people that, in many cases, not in all cases, are not good people. But I think this is an example.
And I just on behalf of all of the folks that have worked hard on this and all of the people that have made contributions, including myself; I gave $1 million, but I just want to tell you that there are so many people that are so thankful for what we did.
One other thing thats important to know. Zero dollars have been taken out for administration.
You know, when you go to a lot of these different groups, in this case, zero dollars have been taken out for administration. So a lot of these companies that make a lot of money doing the administration stuff. So no money  it costs zero dollars to accumulate all of this money. Okay?
So you have 22 Kill and thats $200,000.
And you can call these people. That was another thing. A lot of the money when it was sent out, different people would call. I could tell you, Im not going to mention anybody specifically, but there were a couple of people that were really disgusting. Theyd call and these vet groups they dont get a lot of calls from the press. And maybe some of them would keep quiet or they didnt know or they didnt want to talk to the press or they didnt feel comfortable.
So if they didnt say they got the money, which they all did, 100% got the money. All certified checks. If anyone wants to see the certified checks.
But rather than say why dont you  could I see a certified check? They said "Well, they didnt say they got the money." They all got the money.
But theyre not people that always talk to the press. Many of them do talk to the press. Many of them have  I guess you found $2 million or $2.5 million where they talked.
Well, the number is $5.6 million and its going to possibly go above that because I believe some other people are coming in.
Ready?
22Kill got $200,000.
Now, these are checks that have been delivered, that have been cashed, that are now being used to help the vets.
Achilles International  great organization  $200,000. Much of this money was paid a long time ago.
American Hero Adventures  $100,000.
Americans for Equal Living  $100,000.
Americas Vetdogs  The Veterans K-9 Corps Inc.  $75,000.
AMVETS  $75,000.


Just so you understand. When I didnt do the Fox debate...because I didnt think they treated me right but actually theyve been extremely fair over the last three or four months, I have to say that about Fox. But when I didnt do that one event, the debate, I gave a speech. I didnt have to do this with the money for the vets but I decided to because I thought it would be a good idea.
And I had some very generous people  Carl Icahn gave $500,000. Phil Ruffin gave $1 million...Ike Perlmutter gave $1 million. We raised a lot of money. And I didnt have to do that. It would have been easier just to give the speech.
And the problem with the press what they do is they convince people like me not to do it, not to give money to different things because its a lot easier actually that way.


And I believe were going to have some more coming in. Some friends of mine, some more coming in. And that adds up to $5,600,000 total and were going to have some more coming in.
Now, every one of those checks have been passed other than the one check which is being held subject to theyre getting a final approval from the government. But every one of those has been passed.
This is my check for $1 million.
We have many letters from the different groups thanking us very much for the money and they didnt ask  I didnt ask people to be here today. I could have asked every one of the group unlike Hillary who asks people to stand outside and say "Donald Trump didnt give the money."
Nobody gave this kind of money.
So I gave $5,600,000. More is coming in. Probably tops the $6 million number.
I never thought we were going to raise $1 million when we started. And we end up doing almost $6 million.
I have to tell you the press is so dishonest and so unfair.
A lot of the people behind me and some of the people over here helped in vetting the various requests for money. And I just want to thank all of those people.






I wasnt too involved in picking the organizations other than to the Marine Law Enforcement. They are fabulous people. They honored me last year at the Waldorf Astoria. I knew them.
I was going to give it to three companies or three groups and we couldnt vet them quickly. And so I gave it to the Marine.
And if you look at number, the Marine Corps Law Enforcement Foundation is a fabulous group and I didnt have to go through a big vetting process with them. Because I was going to split the $1 million check up amongst...and in the end I just didnt want to go through the process of having to vet all those different groups.






Because I wanted to make this out of the goodness of my heart. I didnt want to do this where the press is all involved and all of a sudden everybody is going "Where did it go? Who did it go to?" Then we said who it went to, then we said how much was it.
...Look, when this started...I said if we could raise $1 million that would be good. And we ended up raising almost $6 million. And Im going to have more coming in over a period of time.






Im totally accountable but I didnt want to have credit for it.
Actually though what I got was worse than credit because they were questioning me. And this is money. And by the way, most of that money went out very early just so you understand. But a lot of these groups  getting vetted by, you know, when you pay the money out, they need government documentation. They need a lot of different things.


Plus, we want to find out whos in the good group.
I had people  teams of people  reviewing statistics, reviewing numbers and also talking to people in the military to find out whether or not the group was deserving of the money.
We have given to groups that are unbelievable groups. And honestly, I wish you could hear the phone calls and see the letters. They are so happy. And Im happy to do it. I didnt want the credit for it but it was very unfair that the press treated us so badly.






Well, generally speaking, thats 100% true.






I like scrutiny. But you know what? When I raise money  excuse me, excuse me, Ive watched you on television. Youre a real beauty. When I raise money for the veterans and its a massive amount of money  find out how much Hillary Clinton has given to the veterans  nothing.
And then I see a few guys standing out there. They dont even know what theyre there for. They have no idea. Theyre there because Hillary Clintons campaign sent them.
And actually I think it was you or one of you that found out that they actually were with Hillary Clintons campaign, which was interesting but I wasnt surprised.
I dont want the credit for it but I shouldnt be lambasted.
And remember this: So out of the almost $6 million that was raised not one penny did I take for administration cost. Thats unheard of.






How else am I going to raise the money? How else am I going to raise the money?






I would have given  just so you understand. Until I was criticized  so Im the only one in the world that could raise almost $6 million for the veterans, have uniform applause by the veterans groups, and end up being criticized by the press.
Yes, I made a speech and during the speech I said, "Lets raise a little money for the vets." It turned out to be a lot of money, not a little money. I thought if we could get to $1 million, it would be great, which it would have been.






Thats right. I do raise millions.






No, I dont think so.






No, I raised almost $6 million. Some of it didnt come through. But more money is coming through than didnt come through. The number probably is going to be  when we finish it probably going to be over the $6 million.






I dont mind it coming from the opposition...What I do mind is when I raise all of these millions and when we started out nobody ever thought it was going to be over $5 million or close to $6 [million].






So, look, heres the story. Heres the story. I think and Ive been dealing with the press a long time. I think the political press is among the most dishonest people Ive ever met, I have to tell you that. Okay?
...But I think the political press...I think the political press  I see the stories and I see the way theyre attached.
For instance, I went down this weekend to do Rolling Thunder. I was invited. I didnt have anything to do with it. We had a tremendous gathering of people  thousands  I dont know how many thousands  but many thousands of people. And I joked "Oh, I thought we were going to go from the Jefferson Memorial to the  " I was joking. They said "Donald Trump was disappointed". Everybody knew I was being sarcastic and joking. They said some of them. Said Donald Trump was very disappointed that it didnt go from Jefferson to Lincoln. You know, millions of people.
I was joking. I said "Oh, Im used to watching it. We had  " I was joking. So they put it down as serious. They know I was joking.
Ill give you another example. We had a certain  same event  it was roped off where you could only get so many people there and there were a lot of people. I dont know  10,000, 15,000, maybe 25,000. I dont know there was a lot of people. Plus there were people breaking the seams all the way along.
Eugene Washington, a man I like actually, wrote an article said there were 5,000 people there. There were many times that. And you werent allowed to have any more people.
And all of these people were with their motorcycles in parking lots all the way. They were waving to me as Im going.


But wait a minute. The point is law enforcement  these people didnt allow you to have any more people.
...I had a tremendous crowd but it was the biggest crowd you could have had. It was all cordoned off. You werent allowed to have any more. You werent allowed to have any more people than that.
So instead of saying Trump made a speech in front of a packed crowd, they said "Trump was disappointed" because I didnt have millions of people going from Jefferson to Washington. I mean, give me a break.
...Honestly, its dishonest reporting.






Well, the veterans believe me. Let me tell you, the veterans why they believe. And I have group that I gave...[invites a veteran to speak]
...I could have asked all these groups  he just showed up. I just saw him. But I could have asked all these groups to come here and they could have made  I didnt want to do that.
Im not looking for credit. But what I dont want is when I raise millions of dollars have people say like this sleazy guy over here from ABC  hes a sleaze in my book. Youre a sleaze because you know the facts and you know the facts well.
Veteran:
Thank you, Mr. Trump.
First of all for the record, Im a state representative from New Hampshire, 10 years on the veterans affairs committee, 22 years in the Marine Corps, retired First Sergeant.
What I want to clarify here first of all, I would never ever in a million years put my name on a candidate that did not from his heart look me in the eye and tell me hes concerned about veterans. Thats Donald Trump. I met him over a year ago.
Ive been involved in many fundraisers. There are many scammers out there. He did the right thing by vetting these groups there.
If you look at some of the groups, theyre given 20 cents, 40 cents on the dollar and theyre spending the rest for you know their nice lavish trips. He gave 100%.
The liberal media is the only ones that have been calling the foundation. All right? Im a former chairman. Ive been dealing with this stuff for years as a veterans activist.
Stop using veterans as a political pawns. Youve got a guy outside...go do a Google search on his Facebook. Hes out there. His pictures with Clinton.
They are using veterans as political pawns. It must stop.
Donald Trump is doing this with a heart. Youre all focused on the way hes raising money and youre not looking at the 22 veterans that are killing each other everyday. Youre not concerned about the thousands of veterans that are on waitlists.
Look at his plans on his Trump website. He talks about medical cards. He talks about fixing the VA. He talks about competition.
I think the liberal media and Ive been dealing with you a long time. You need to get your head out of your butt. Focus on the real issues.
Thank you.


What I did  I didnt ask Al. Ive gotten to know Al a little bit primarily through New Hampshire where we had great victories. But he showed up this morning because he was upset.
And many of the other groups were upset. They received $100,000 in the mail. They didnt even know what it was for. It was from me. Other groups received $200,000, $250,000. They didnt know what it was for.
And again, upstairs I have received phones calls with people crying. I have received letters  heartfelt letters.
...The bad part about the dishonesty of the media is that people like me will be inclined not to do it anymore. Because why should you raise $5.6 million and I think Ill go over $6 million pretty easily. Nobody said that we started this out as a small little project where it was less than $1 million because it kept just mushrooming and building and building. But nobody talks about that.
So we raised $5.6 million. We have so many happy groups. So many happy veterans.
And then I see these Hillary Clinton people outside. Now, of course, they dont know the extent. They probably figured based on reading the press that Trump didnt make, you know, didnt raise this kind of money.
But we raised a lot and Ill be raising more and well be sending it to other people as we get along.






Its a complicated process.






No, it doesnt...You know, the government sort of approves different groups for a lot of reasons. So it really does  and more than anything else, its also speaking to other veterans. We have a circle of veterans. I dont want to send a $250,000 check to a group that doesnt do good work. So its called vetting. We vet the vets. But its called vetting.






I think its bothersome because I love the vets and Ive worked hard for the vets. And as you can see, Ive given a lot of money and raised a lot of money for the vets.
And I think when the press portrays it differently, the press is being very dishonest. So I dont like that. I dont like dishonesty.






Jeff Sessions is a fantastic man. Jeff Sessions is one of the most highly respected people in the United States Senate.
Jeff Sessions is a person that I believe that Ted Cruz has the most respect for and I think Ted thought that he would get an endorsement.
You know, Jeff Sessions has never endorsed a presidential candidate before as many years as hes been in the Senate.
So you know, Jeff Sessions is certainly somebody that I would consider. Absolutely. Hes a fantastic person.






I think it was a very tough call. It was amazing because there were moments with the gorilla the way he held that child that almost like a mother holding a baby  looks so beautiful and calm. And there were moments where it looked pretty dangerous. I dont think they had a choice. I mean, probably they didnt have a choice.
You have a child, a young child, at stake. You know, its too bad there wasnt another way.
I thought it was so beautiful to watch that powerful almost 500 pound gorilla and the way he dealt with that little boy. But it just takes one second. Its one second  its not like it takes place over  well, hes going to do it 30 seconds from now. It just takes one little flick of his finger. And I will tell you they probably had no choice.
...




Im entirely in favor of fixing the VA health care. VA is one of the great catastrophes in this country whats going on.
You look at whats happening in Phoenix and different places throughout the country where theyre catching people stealing and they dont even fire them, where people are waiting five days, six days, seven days on line. Theyre dying while they wait on line.
And I am in favor of if they cant get to a doctor within a reasonable period of time, theyre going to see a doctor and the countrys going to pay for it. Theyre going to go to a private doctor or a public hospital and a public doctor but some place that can take them immediately. Were losing thousands of people waiting on line.
And the Veterans Administration is run by Obama just as incompetently as hes running our country.
You look at the TSA, you look at whats going on at the airports and you look at that. Okay? Just take a look at that. Thats like the Veterans Administration.
Nothing in our country works anymore. Its a mess.
And maybe thats why Im doing so well in the polls.






No, it doesnt have to be privatization. No, it doesnt have to be privatization. What it has to be is when somebodys on line and they say its going to be a seven day wait, that person is going to walk over to across the street to a private doctor, be taken care of. Were going to pay the bill.
And by the way, thats going to be a lot less expensive. And well check it out and be careful. But thats going to be a lot less expensive than whats going on.
These people are living in hell.
And Hillary Clinton said the Veterans Administration is working just fine. And the head of it, [Bob] McDonald said last week that waiting in line is not bad  look at Disney World. Okay? These are the kind of people we have running things. Its ridiculous.






...Thats their choice. You have a party called the Democrats and theyre going to have to make that choice. I think its probably going to be her because its rigged.
And I think if you people will say Im the one that came up with the term "rigged". I used it for myself, except that I won by such big margins that the whole system is rigged on both sides. With the Republicans its less obvious. With Democrats with the whole super delegate thing, its ridiculous.
So I think that theyre going to have to make that determination.
If youre asking me who I prefer running against?






I think what she did was very bad and I think a lot of people have done a lot less than her and their lives have been destroyed.




The judge has been very unfair. Has not done a good job. Hes been a very bad judge. Has been very unfair. And I will win the Trump University case. I already am as far as Im concerned. But I will win the Trump University case.
Because I dont care...
I have a judge whos very, very unfair.
Well, youll see it in court documents. But I have a judge whos very, very unfair. He knows hes unfair. And Ill win the Trump University case. I can settle that case. I could have settled it. I just choose not to.
In fact, when I ran this, they said why didnt you settle up that case? I dont want to settle the case.
Because you know what? Because Im a man of principle. And most of the people that took those courses have letters saying they thought it was great essentially. It was good. It was great.
And you know what? When theyre on the stand and you say "How come you signed the letter saying that Trump University was so good? How come you signed the letter?"
The woman that was the original plaintiff in the case  they went to the court and the judge allowed her to get out of the case. The case should have been dropped. The whole case should have been dropped.
They wanted her dismissed from the case. You know why? Because she was deposed, she was such a bad witness that wed win the case easily. She signed a letter and shes on film. Shes on tape like these cameras saying unbelievably good things about Trump University. So they didnt want her anymore because shes a disaster for them.
So they went to the judge and they said "Your honor, wed like to have her not be a participant, not be a plaintiff in the case." And he said, "Oh, thats okay." Shes the one that started the case.
Now, they dont even want her to testify. They dont want her to testify because shes a disaster. She has all sorts of beautiful statements about it. And importantly, shes on tape saying how great it is. They dont want her. I wouldnt want her either.
Now, I could have settled that case. I could settle that case. I can settle that case. I dont want to. Ill go through the process.






Because were down the line. Because were down the line and the fact that you cant win as independent. For the most part, you cant even get on Texas and various other states now. Its too late. But Texas is out.
...Heres what happens. What happens is you will not have  and very importantly  you will not have Supreme Court justices. Youre going to lose. You could have as many as four or five. Thats over.
Now, [Bill] Kristols the one thats  but hes the last one. Dont forget, he said "Trump will never run." The guys not a smart person. He said, "Donald Trump would never run." Remember?
You remember? I actually blame you. Why do you put this guy on television? I see him on the different shows. Hes got no credibility. Said I wont run. If I run, I wont do well. If I do well, this and that. He looks like such a fool.
I saw him on one show. Hes practically crying because he cant justify.
Now he comes out with a tweet over the weekend  over Memorial Day weekend  it sounds like hes going to put somebody up. Even I thought it. I thought, "Oh, theyre going to find indie."
Now he comes out with something saying he was almost  almost  kidding. Okay?
Let me tell you, these people are losers. Hes trying to make you  hes trying to drive you guys a little bit nuts.
If they do an indie, assuming its decent, which I dont think anybody with a reputation would do it because theyd look like fools. But what youre going to do is you lose the election for the Republicans and therefore you lose the Supreme Court, therefore you will have a group of people put on the Supreme Court where this country will never ever recover. It will never, ever be the same.






No, I didnt say that. I said Bill Kristol is a loser and Ill tell you why...He has called every single move. Take a look  on me, hes going to lose this state  I won in a landslide...I didnt say everybody. Many. I didnt say everybody.
Wait, wait, wait. Bill Kristol is a loser. His magazine is failing, as you know. Its going to be down  I dont think it even survives. Hes getting some free publicity.
But Bill Kristol  Ive been watching this for two years. "Trump isnt going to run." Then I go into a race, we go into New Hampshire. "Oh, hes not going to win New Hampshire." I win in a landslide. Every place I went I was not going to win. But I win in a landslide. Do you think maybe he doesnt like me?






Its wrong. Its wrong. I didnt get 30%.






My last score was 78%. I didnt get 30%.






I dont know. No, no, no.
Heres the way I look at it.
When I have somebody thats not on my side, when you know  by the way, Ive gotten great applause from the press in terms of as an achievement because the Republican Party is really well unified.
We have come up. People that you would have never thought possible are now saying, "I support Trump." So remember that. We dont talk about that too much.
But actually last week, the big story was how fast the Republican Party is healing because it is a healing process. It was a rough  that was a rough campaign...
I can this. The real is how fast were getting together.
Now, if I have a Republican whos not on my side, Im not going to be  why should I be particularly nice to that person? Im not going to go after it like I would Hillary or Crazy Bernie. But you know what? Why should I be nice to that person if I have a person thats not going to support me? I have no obligation.
Politically, I may be right. I may be wrong. But thats who I am. Im a very honest person...
If somebody is going to say a little bit negative or a lot negative about me and if they happen to be Republican, I may choose to hit them back. Not always. But I may choose to hit them back.






Im not a fan of Mitt Romney. Mitt Romney lost an election he should have won.
And if you read the front page of the Wall Street Journal about Mitt Romney, he looks like a fool.
Look, Im not a fan of Mitt Romney. Just so you understand. I raised a lot of money for Mitt Romney. I made robocalls for Mitt Romney. I made speeches for him. He let us down.
If you read the front page of the Wall Street Journal this weekend, Mitt Romney looks like a fool.
Now, what would I say good about Mitt Romney?






She was not nice and I was fine, just a little bit of a jab. But she wasnt nice. And you think Im going to change? Im not changing, including with her.






Bob Dole is a fan of mine. Bob Dole endorsed me. So dont tell me about Bob Dole.






Well, look, Gary Johnson, he got 1% of the vote last time. I watched that whole situation. It was pretty disgraceful. I think its a total fringe deal. I think hes a fringe candidate if you want to know the truth. I look at him and I watch him and I watch his motions and I watch what he says. I think that he is a fringe candidate...when you do a little research on that I think its not going to be a factor. Okay?






No, not all of you. Just many of you.






Yeah, it is. Yeah, it is. Let me tell you something. Im a person  yeah, its going to be like this...If the press writes false stories like they did with this  half of you were amazed that I raised all of this money. If the press writes false stories like they did where I wanted to keep a low profile. I didnt want the credit for raising all this money for the vets. I wasnt looking for the credit.
And by the way, more money is coming in. I wasnt looking for the credit.
But I had no choice but to do this because the press was saying I didnt raise any money for them.
Not only did I raise it, much of it was given a long time ago. And there is a vetting process and I think you understand that.
But when I raise almost $6 million and probably in the end will raise more than six because more is going to come in and is coming in. But when I raise $5.6 million as of today, more is coming in. And this is going to phenomenal groups.
And I have many of these people vetting the people getting the money and working hard. And then we have to read probably libelous stories or certainly close in the newspapers and the people know the stories are false, Im going to continue to attack the press.
Look, I find the press to be extremely dishonest. I find the political press to be unbelievably dishonest. I will say that.
Okay, thank you all very much. Thank you. Thank you very much.


Well, thank you very much everyone.
I want to start by, as always, thanking my family. My wife, Melania. My kids  theyre not kids anymore but theyre kids as far as Im concerned. Theyll always be my kids. And I want to thank my great parents who are looking down right now and my brother looking down on us. I want to thank my entire family, including Maryanne, Elizabeth, Robert.
And its been some unbelievable day and evening and year. I never have been through anything like this but its a beautiful thing to watch and a beautiful thing to behold, and were going to make America great again. Were going to make America great again.
So important  so important that the people of Indiana have been incredible.
I started as you know not very long ago  about six weeks ago  and I was told that I had a 20 point deficit.
And I went there and I worked very hard and I campaigned and I made lots of speeches and met lots of incredible people  incredible people. You dont get better, and the crowds got bigger and bigger. And toward the end, it was like I didnt want to leave. I almost said, "Maybe Ill just never leave" and it resonated somehow and we have a tremendous victory tonight.
It was a tremendous victory.
And I have to thank Bobby Knight. Boy, Bobby Knight was incredible. He was incredible.
I always that people like that  there arent many  but its called tough, smart, and they know how to win. And thats what our country needs. We have to win again. We have to know how to win.
And we havent won. Weve been losing all the time. We lose with our military. We cant beat ISIS. We lose with trade. We lose with borders. We lose everything.
Were not going to lose. Were going to start winning again and were going to win big league. Believe me.
So when I got back tonight and I started watching all of the different networks, I could immediately that we were doing very well, and it really looks like a massive victory and it looks like we win all 57 delegates.


And I must say in staying in various places in Indiana, I turned on the television and all I saw was negative ads, negative one after another after another.
And I called my people and I said, "How can we win? Its just constantly." It was the same as in Florida. You know, thereve been 60,000 negative ads.
I got it right from you folks, okay? 60,000. In fact, two weeks ago it was 55,000. Now its 60,000 negative ads  most of which are absolutely false and disgusting. And I said how can anybody endure this?
I had one evening two nights ago where literally they had five ads on in between segments of a show that I was watching. And I said thats just incredible.
And the people are so smart. They dont buy it. They get it.
And its tremendous, tremendous amounts of money were spent  millions and millions of dollars. And they were comparing it. They think it was probably $8 million was spent against me and we spent $900,000. So, I mean, to me thats the way its supposed to be. Thats something that makes me feel really, really very good.
And now were going to Nebraska where I have  I just hear were doing really wonderfully. I look forward to that very much.
And West Virginia. And were going to get those miners back to work. Ill tell you what. Were going to get those miners back to work.
Were not going to be Hillary Clinton, and I watched her three or four weeks ago where she was talking about the miners as if they were just numbers and she was talking about she wants the mines closed and she will never let them work again.
Let me tell you, the miners in West Virginia and Pennsylvania which was so great to me last week and Ohio and all over, theyre going to start to work again. Believe me. Youre going to be proud again to be miners.
So well be going there. I must say this tremendous run that weve had started with New York when we had almost 62%. And dont forget, thats with three people. So 62% with two people is a massive landslide. But 63% almost  just a little over 62%  when you have that kind of a number with three people, its actually unheard of.
And all throughout, it was 17 people, then 15, then 12, you know, its tremendous, and we were getting very high numbers. And some of the numbers in my opinion that I got in the early stages were in a state with 32% but there were 14 people. I think that might actually be more and better than getting 62% in New York. But we never got the credit for that.
But now we dont need the credit because were going after Hillary Clinton. She will not be a great president. She will not be a good president. She will be a poor president.
She doesnt understand trade. Her husband signed perhaps in the history of the world the single worst trade deal ever done. Its called NAFTA.
And I was witnessed to the carnage over the last six weeks especially. Now Ive known Syracuse and Ive known Poughkeepsie and Ive known all of the different places that I visited in New York and then Pennsylvania and then Maryland, which treated me so great the people are incredible.


And all of the different state  Connecticut. And Ive witnessed what its done really firsthand. And it has been indeed carnage.
And were going to change it around.
Were not going to let Carrier and all of these companies just think they can move  go to another country, make their products, sell it back to us, and we get only one thing: We get unemployment. Not going to happen anymore, folks. Not going to happen anymore.
Were going to bring back our jobs and were going to keep our jobs. Were not going to let companies leave.
Now, if they want to go to a different state, good luck, compete.
But when they start going to different countries and in many cases countries that devalue their currency and make it impossible for our companies to compete, thats not going to happen. Not going to happen.
And if they want to do it anyway, there will be consequences, and there will be very, very serious consequences.
I have to tell you that Ive competed all my life. Competitive person. All my life Ive been in competitions. Different competitions whether its sports or business or now for 10 months politics.
And I have to tell you that I have met some of the most incredible competitors that I have ever competed against right here on the Republican Party.
You know, we started off with that 17 number. And just so you understand  Ted Cruz  I dont know if he likes me or if he doesnt like me. But he is one hell of a competitor. He is a tough, smart guy.
And he has got an amazing future. Hes got an amazing future. So I want to congratulate Ted.
And I know how tough it is. Its tough. Its tough.
Ive had some moments where its not looking so good, and its not a great feeling. And so I understand how Ted feels and Heidi and their whole beautiful family.
And I just want to say that one tough competitor and I can say that for the others. I mean, Chris Christie who endorsed me. Incredible guy. Dr. Ben Carson who was right up there, one of the first. He just called me and said, "Its a movement youve got going. Weve got to do something because Ill tell you what, its an incredible movement." And Dr. Ben Carson endorsed me. And I want to tell you that is an incredible man and we want to keep Ben totally involved because were going to win. Were going to win in November.
And were going to win big and its going to be America first.
You know, I made a speech the other day and I talked about how were the policemen for the world, how we protect other countries and they dont respect us and they dont take care of us and they dont treat us right in many cases.
And thats not going to happen.
Now, were going to keep things going and were going to keep things going very nicely but we owe  soon  $21 trillion. Its $19 trillion now but with a budget that was recently done, soon it will be $21 trillion.
And were just not in a position that were in 30 years ago, 40 years ago, 50 years ago when a lot of these things took place and began taking place.


So, were going to have unbelievably good relationships with other countries.
But likewise they have to treat us fairly and they have to understand that what weve been doing over the years has been so wrong and so unfair to the United States, to its people, and to its taxpayers.
So that will change. And I will tell you, theyre going to end up liking us better than they do right. Theyre going to respect us.
In this building right upstairs, I have the largest bank in the world from China. The relationship is fantastic.
We have great relationships with many foreign countries. But they have to respect us and they have to understand where were coming from.
And you know, it is a two-way street. And the two-way street means that were going down one side and theyre coming up the other. And were going to meet and we are going to have something thats going to be really fabulous.
Now, if that cant happen. If for some reason they want this system to continue the way its going now, which is not fair and not good, where were spending trillions and trillions of dollars probably $4 trillion in the Middle East.
And we have to build our infrastructure, our roads. We have to rebuild our bridges, our airports, our hospitals in this country.
Weve become close to a third world country. You look at some of our airports; its third world. And then you go to other countries and you see places like youve never seen.
So I have to say that we are going to turn it around.
Were going to build up our military bigger, better, stronger than ever before. Its the cheapest thing we can do. And were going to have to take out ISIS and were going to have to take them out fast. We cant allow that cancer to continue. We cannot allow it to continue.
And you know, one group thats been so incredible to me are the vets  the veterans. And theyve been treated so badly. So badly. And were going to get that straightened out.
Now, one of the things that just happened, which to me is very exciting and its happened now with two or three. But the Rasmussen poll came out yesterday and in that poll, Im now leading Hillary Clinton. A lot of good things...
And thats going to continue because theyre not going to be able to do it, folks.
Theyre not going to be able to make great trade deals. We have such bad deals.
Theyre not going to be able to do what we do with the military.
Theyre not going to be able to do what were going to do on the border, including the wall.
Were going to have unbelievably great relationships with the Hispanics. The Hispanics have been so incredible to me. They want jobs. Everybody want jobs. The African-Americans want jobs. You look at whats going on. They want jobs.
And were going to bring back our jobs. Were going to save our jobs and people are going to have great jobs again.
And this country, which is very, very divided in so many different ways is going to become one beautiful loving country. And were going to love each other. Were going to cherish each other. Were going to take care of each other. And were going to have great economic development.
And were not going to let other countries take it away from us because thats whats been happening for far too many years and were not going to do it anymore. Were not going to do it anymore.
I want to thank and congratulate the Republican National Committee and Reince Priebus, who I just spoke to. Hes doing a tremendous job. Its not an easy job when he had 17 egos and now I guess hes down to one.


I dont know. Is there a second? I mean, is there a second? I dont know.
But I have ask you folks to explain the status of that.
But hes done an amazing job and I think were going to see something really, really fantastic.
I also want to thank my staff, Paul, Cory, Pope. I mean, these people. What weve been doing has been incredible.
The work has been unreal.
And Jared [Kushner], married to my daughter Ivanka. I mean, honestly, you know Jared is a very successful real estate person but I actually think he likes politics more than he likes real estate. Im excited. And hes very good at politics.
So again folks this has been an amazing evening. I didnt expect this. I didnt expect it.
And what Ted did is really a very brave thing to do and a great thing to do because we want to bring unity to the Republican Party. We have to bring unity. Its so much easier if we have it.
And many, many people are calling that you wouldnt even believe  the media, the press, they wouldnt believe. People who have said the worst things about me  Ive never had things said about me like this.
You know, with my businesses, Ive always been very respected. People didnt talk to me this way. But in politics, its easy.
The worst things and theyre calling now and theyre calling us all and theyre saying, "Wed love to get on the train"  the "Trump Train" they call it  "But wed love to get on the team."
And I actually spoke to one today who was vicious. I mean, this guy was unbelievable. And I said, "Id love having you and I think its terrific. But after what you said about me how can you possibly join our team?" And he said, "Mr. Trump, dont even think about it. Dont worry about it. Therell be no problem." In other words, hes a politician; theres no problem. I would have had a hard time.
But we have a lot of people coming  lots of congressmen. I have to thank Jeff Sessions  Sen. Jeff Sessions  one of the most respected men or people in Congress.
And so many others. I mean, Sarah Palin has been from day one incredible.
Jerry Falwell, Jr. Liberty University, I mean he is something. He is really a special person. Theyve done an incredible job and everybody goes through Liberty. We all go through Liberty and somehow he liked what I was saying and perhaps he liked the way I said it. But hes a special guy and he really has helped. And so many pastors and ministers.
And tonight, I see that I won with the evangelicals. The evangelical vote was for Trump.
And theres no greater honor. No greater honor. Were going to work together for many, many years. Were going to make it so good. Were going to be saying Merry Christmas again. Were going to be saying it...
And I won with women. I love winning with women. But I won with women. I won with men. We won with Hispanics. We won with African-Americans. We won with every  virtually every category. So its just been an amazing evening.
So again, I want to congratulate Ted Cruz. He is a tough, smart competitor. I want to thank my wife and my family. Its an incredible family.
I want to thank my staff  both my staff and my thousands and thousands of people that work for the Trump organization, and perhaps in all fairness more importantly on this evening and for what were doing currently, my staff where were running for the presidency.
And remember this. Our theme is very simple. Its make America great. We will make America great again. We will start winning again. You will be so proud of this country very, very soon.
Thank you all. Thank you very much. Thank you! Thank you very much!


So beautiful. She said, "Do you mind? I wrote something  coming out, I wrote something. Do you mind if I said it?" I said, "Not at all. Should I read it?" She said, "I dont want you to read it. I dont want you to read it."
Thank you very much. I want to thank Melania for that. That was very special.
You know, Wisconsins a really special place, and weve been all over today. Speeches all over. We had one before. Thousands and thousands of people standing outside of an airplane hangar because the hangar was packed. And we had another one in the morning, and its been an amazing day, and some phenomenal results.
You see whats happening with the polls. Boom! Like a rocket ship. Its like a rocket.
I guess I just heard when I walked in one just came out that were 10 points up. But dont worry about that. Pretend you didnt hear that. Go out and vote tomorrow. Okay? Go out and vote tomorrow.
You know, I always tell  I used to say this to politicians that run thatd be friends of mine, Id say, "Pretend youre a little bit behind. Okay? That way youd work hard. Youd never forget."
But you know, theres somebody that was  I saw just a little while ago in the audience a very special woman, an incredible woman, and Melania just said hello and met her was so taken, and she represented you so beautifully. And some of you know who she is. Many of you know who she is.
But she was Miss Wisconsin. She has one of the most incredible spirits that Ive ever seen. Shes got her husband and her son and her son is absolutely magnificent and she loves him more than anything that you can imagine.


Ill tell you thats an amazing and just an incredible story and were going to make sure that it goes as well as it can.
She was so amazing the way she walked up here and just spoke from the heart, and we all have to speak from the heart.
And you noticed no teleprompters? We dont have teleprompters. We want to do it right from here and from here and from here.
But I just want to  I saw Melissa, and I said, "I have to have you up" because her storys an amazing story and its a story of courage and were going to work with her family and were going to make sure everything goes well.
Okay, thank you all very much.
So, in coming over today and in going through a few of them, I said to a few of the folks Ive got to explain whats happening because our country is being decimated by stupidity, by bad deals, by horrible trades, by TPP, which Cruz wants badly and which is going to destroy Wisconsin.
This Trans-Pacific Partnership is a disaster. Cruz is pushing it hard.
Kasich, I dont think hes a player here. I mean, the guy is one in 32. Hes one and it was in his own state. And if I would have campaigned there two more days instead of staying in Florida, I would have won in my opinion Ohio. Hes one and 32.
Now, in all fairness, Jeb Bush was doing a lot better than that. Many people were doing better. Its called you get out. Hes taking my votes. We have to get over 50%. And how do you do that?
Look, at a certain point in life, what you do is you say, "Im one in 32. In other words, Ive won one out of 32 states," and you do what Marco did, which was great, and you do what Rand Paul did, and you do what a lot of them did, and you get out.


And shes going through a very hard time. And she has been so supportive and so like just incredible of what were all  what were trying to do. Not me. Im a messenger. What were trying to do  make America great again and bring it back and stop letting the world take advantage of us both militarily and we dont win anymore.
We dont win anymore. We dont win with trade. We dont win with the military.
We pay for everybody elses military.
We dont know what were doing.
And she saw it and she was here early. And she knows that were going to take care of our people, and its going to be America first. Its got to be America first. We have no choice. We have no choice.
And shes with a friend of hers whos very well-known, Chelsea Cooley, who is a tremendous, tremendous woman and just an amazing person. Also a great singer but I wont even mention that because Chelsea would be the last to want to have people know that. Chelsea is such a great friend of Melissa Young and Melissa Young  I just want to bring her and Chelsea onto the stage and maybe Melissa would like to say something and Chelsea. But this is just an unbelievable woman.
So could I ask Melissa to come up on stage please?


And by the way, if you want, you could put your name up and you say "I want to run" and you go to the convention and you run.
But it would be nice to see  because Ill tell you what, he takes my votes away much more than he does Cruz. And I dont like it. I dont think its right. I dont think its appropriate.
But you know what? If we have to live with him, we still beat him easily. Okay, folks? I mean, okay?
But Kasich voted for NAFTA. NAFTA was a disaster for Wisconsin and it was a disaster for our country.
Ted Cruz wants TPP and it is going to make NAFTA look like peanuts. What theyre doing to us with those documents, and Cruz is the one that insisted that we cant talk about money manipulation, which is devaluation of currencies in the agreement. He wouldnt let them do it. Hes the one that fought currency devaluation. Thats the single biggest tool that other countries have for taking our business, taking our money, and taking our jobs. And we cant let this go on any longer.
Now, theyre controlled by their PACs. Theyre controlled by the people that put up their campaign contributions. Theyre controlled, you know, with the lobbyists in Washington. They have signs on their forehead. Its like stamped into their forehead  "I take care of Cruz." Theyre specialists. "I take care of Kasich." "I take care of Hillary."
Oh, Hillary. Ayeyeye. "Take care of Hillary."
So we cant let it happen anymore. We cant let it happen anymore.
Its time  you know Obama used to say, "Time for change"? Ill say its time for change but real change this time not that change. Real change.
Obama yesterday  President Obama yesterday for the first time he started having reservations about the Iran deal. I could have told him that six months ago, nine months ago, long before it was signed. The ink isnt even dry and now hes finally starting to understand it was a big beautiful mistake and its only going to get worse.
And by the way, Iran is getting worse. They were supposed to come into the community. Remember? What a bunch of babies. Are we babies? Are we babies? Hello over there.
They were supposed to come into the community and they were supposed to, you know, get involved.
Now, you see they just ordered 118 Airbus jets. Those are the big jets. 100. They didnt order Boeing.
The reason  one of the reasons is we restrict them from spending. So we give them $150 billion and theyre not even allowed to give us money by investing, by buying our products. Okay? How crazy are we? How much longer is it going to last? When are we going to get smart? When are we going to stop?
We as a country are being ripped off. We are being ripped off by virtually every single country in the world. Okay? Whether its militarily or trade.
We dont win anymore. We cant win with the military. We cant beat ISIS.
Can you imagine Gen. MacArthur or Gen. George Patton? They say get rid of ISIS. What do you think?
...Its so sad to see whats happening to our country and were going to turn it around and were going to change it. And were going to make it rich again, and were going to make it strong again.
So, and so many different elements, and Ive been talking about trade. I always talk about trade.
Because when I announced on June 16th coming down the escalator with Melania, it was like the Academy Awards. There were so many cameras; Ive never seen anything like it. So many cameras. And I took a deep breadth and I said, "Lets go." Because we have to do it.
You know, it takes guts. Running for president, believe me, takes guts. It takes a lot of guts. Believe me.
And even for the politicians they run at least theyre out on the line, and then you see the dishonesty. You see where I won Louisiana and then I find out that Im not supposed to get as many delegates as the person that I beat. What kind of stuff is that?
And somebody said, "Well, theres a rule and another rule." I dont care about rules, folks. I go out and I campaign. We win. We win. We get the delegates. Right?
But in the meantime, we have millions more votes than Cruz. Weve beaten him in most of the states. I mean, were just winning so much. And were winning by almost 300 delegates.
So were doing great. And I think we close it out before the convention. I think we actually close it out before the convention.


And thats like a prizefighter. You know, they go into unfriendly territory, and the champ, he goes in. And they say, "What do you think? You may have an unfriendly decision." He says, "No, when you knock them out, theres no unfriendly decision."
If we get the delegates, weve pulled out a knock-out. And thats the way its going to be, and I can see that happening because more and more people are calling, they want to get on board.
Frankly, when I looked at what happened  a friend of mine, whos a great  you know, one of my great friends, he lives right down  not very far from here. And he said, "With Wisconsin, youre going win." I said, "Well, what do you think? But Im not seeing polls that are great. Im a little bit down. Im down in some. Im a little bit down." He says, "No, no, youre going to win. But you have to be there. You have to come in and you have to talk to the people." Like we did this afternoon at the hangar. And he said, "Youre going to win. I mean, youre going to win." Hes a very smart guy, I want to tell you. Great guy. But he said, "Youve got to come in."
Weve been making  Ive been making speeches, three today, four yesterday, three or four the other day. Were here constantly. Youre going to get so sick of me. Youre going to say, "Oh, get him the hell out of here."
No, we are making so much progress and its been so inspiring to see the people. I mean, look at even you people. You dont sit down. If you want, you can. Oh, stay up. Stand up. What the heck? Hey, weve got plenty of time to sit down, right? Weve got plenty of time.
But I do appreciate that. Thats a sign of affection, and its a sign of respect, and I really do appreciate it. Thats really nice.
So we have to bring our country back and so many different things.
With China, we have a trade deficit of $500 billion a year.
With Mexico, we will build a wall. We will have strong borders. Strong borders. Believe me. We have a trade deficit of $58 billion a year. The walls going to cost $10 billion to build. And people, the politicians are saying, "How can you possibly get them to pay?"
Let me tell you something, folks. We have some good business people in this audience.
When you have a $58 billion deficit, and you have a $10 billion wall, thats real easy. And thats on a yearly basis the $58 billion. Its really easy.
And they dont understand it. They said, "How are you going to get them to pay?"
I said, "Its so easy." And you understand it. Just rely on me. Okay? Rely. So easy. Thats so easy. And were going to have a strong border.
You know, two days ago I was greatly honored because the Border Patrol, the folks that do a great job, and theyre told to stand back but they dont want to stand back. They want to do their job properly. Theyre proud people. Theyre incredible people. Frankly, before the wall goes up, we might not even need the wall, but were building it anyway. Okay? Were building it. Believe me.
But the Border Patrol people are unbelievable people, and its 15,500 people gave me an endorsement two days ago. And I didnt ask for it. I didnt know.
First time, first time theyve ever done it. Right? First time, theyve ever done it and they gave me an endorsement. And its so important.
Now, Sheriff Joe [Arpaio] from Arizona. You know, I won Arizona very big, and Sheriff Joe was with me and it was incredible and we love it.
Look, we have to have strong borders. We cant let the Syrians come in that we have no idea who they are, where theyre coming from. We dont know if theyre Syrians.
This could be the all-time great Trojan horse. Who knows?
I have as big a heart as anybody. We want to help them. We want to build safe zones in Syria.
I want to get the Gulf States to pay for it. The Gulf States have nothing but money. We dont have money. We will run it. We will do a good job. Well get it done but let somebody else pay for it for a change. We cant do it.
...I keep getting these requests. You know, Al Green  the great Al Green wrote "The Snake". How many people have heard "The Snake"? How many people? Oh, do you want to hear "The Snake"? Do you want to hear it? I mean, people love it and I love it because it says whats going to happen to us if were not careful.
And this really pertains to allowing people into our country that we know are going  were going to have problems. Were going to have huge problems. Allowing people in from areas of the world we dont know where they come from. We dont know where their documents are. They say they dont have documents. They have no papers. No nothing. We let them in. How stupid can we be?
So this is called "The Snake" and I think its pretty good. All right? Are you ready for this? A couple of you have heard it but some of you havent.


"On her way to work one morning, down the path along the lake, a tender-hearted woman saw a poor half-frozen snake. His pretty colored skin had been all frosted with the dew. Oh well, she cried, Ill take you in, and Ill take care of you. Take me in, oh tender woman. Take me in for heavens sake. Take me in, oh tender woman, cried the broken snake. She wrapped him up all cozy in a curvature of silk and then laid him by the fireside with some honey and some milk. Now she hurried home from work that night. As soon as she arrived, she found that pretty snake shed taken in had been revived. Take me in, oh tender woman. Take me in for heavens sake. Take me in, oh tender woman, sighed the broken snake. Now she clutched him to her bosom. Youre so beautiful, she cried. But if I hadnt brought you in by now, heavens sake you might have died. Now she stroke his pretty skin and then she kissed him and held him tight. But instead of saying thank you, that snake gave her a vicious bite. Take me in, oh tender woman. Take me in for heavens sake. Take me in, oh tender woman, sighed the very, very healthy snake. I saved you, cried the woman, And you bit me. Heavens why? You know your bite is poisonous and now Im going to die. Oh shut up, silly woman, said the reptile with a grin. You knew damn well I was a snake before you took me in."
Right?
Thats whats happening to our country, folks. Thats whats happening to our country and we cant let it happen. We have to be smart. We have to be vigilant. We have to be strong. And if were not, were not going to have a country.
And we need borders and were going to have borders.
And we need great trade deals and were going to make great trade deals.
And we cant let Mexico and I have great respect for Mexico and I respect their leaders but we cant let Mexico and China and any country you want to name steal our business, steal our jobs.
When you look at whats happening in Wisconsin  and you see it  the reason I beat your governor and I beat him badly was I just read off the statistics. I just read  all I did, I stood up and I read statistics. Youre losing jobs...Its very average. Its very average.
Our country is less than average. Okay? Our country is doing so badly. And its just one of those things and we have to smarten up and we have to get really tough. We have to get so, so, so vigilant and not be so politically correct. We have to do whats right for our country.
When the great Ford Motor Company  great company  when they build a $2.5 billion plant in Mexico, when Nabisco moves its massive plant to Mexico from Chicago, we cant let it happen.
When Carrier Air Conditioners, as you know, they just announced theyre moving to Mexico.
Pfizer is moving to Ireland.
But let me just tell you. So, I watched the politicians and they have no business instincts. But more importantly, theyre taken care of.
You know, a lot of friends come up to me and they say, "Donald, let me ask you a question. These politicians  are they really that dumb?" I said, "No, theyre not actually that dumb. Some are. But theyre not actually that dumb. Theyre all taken care of by the special interests. And when you want something done, you see certain people in Washington."
Hey, who is better than me? I mean, take a look at me. I was before June 16th, I was a part of the establishment and they will do not whats right for you but they will do whats right for the company they represent or the country they represent and the United States continues to get ripped off, ripped off, ripped off.
And a lot of times, Ill say, "How can a deal be so stupidly made? These people are so stupid." Theyre not stupid. Theyre doing it for themselves. Theyre doing it because they want campaign contributions. Theyre doing it because they want money put in their PACs. They are totally controlled by the money. Believe me. They are totally controlled by the money, and thats not good for our country. Okay? Thats not good because terrible things are happening and were getting weaker and weaker.
Hundreds of thousands and even millions of jobs are being taken out.


You look at the jobs we have. Even in Wisconsin, I mean, you see the jobs, the manufacturing, its all so down and so gloomy and throughout the United States. And its a disaster whats going on in our country. Were not going to have jobs left.
And they do it with manipulation of currency. And they do it with guile. They do it with so many different elements that our people dont even know whats happening.
Our politicians in most cases dont even know whats happening. And when they do know whats happening and they let it happen, its even worse.
So Im not taking money from anybody. Im self-funding my campaign.
And were going to get it. Were going to get it.
Now, I look at this U.S. manufacturing  I mean, just look at this. Look at these charts. I mean, you can see them...This is where were going.
You know thats not good. Right? This is where were going.
There was one that I just saw. Just got this. Its like incredible.
Look at this. This is U.S. manufacturing jobs rapidly decline since year 2000. Look at that chart. Another couple of years, there wont be any jobs.
And the jobs we have now are bad jobs. These are bad jobs. These arent good jobs. And everybody admits that. Even the other side says, "We agree. Theyre bad jobs."
And the number that they talk about when they say 5% unemployment  its a fictitious number. When you stop looking for a job, youre considered statistically employed.
It was a number that was made up years ago probably by president but certainly by politicians to make them look good, to make them look really good like the economy.
The economy is not good. The economy is bad.
Were sitting on a bubble. The banks have money. They give it to you for nothing if youre rich. If youre not rich, thats when you need the money, they dont loan it to you. So the people cant do jobs.
Probably here you have some great companies, some really good smaller companies, you cant get the banks to give you money. The banks are controlled by the regulators. They system that this country is run under is out of control.
And were going to change it. Were going to bring back the jobs. Were going to bring back our companies.
And you know Ive had such a response. And the reason Ive had response is because of that and then I look at the ads today.
Im in hotel and I look at the ads and Cruz makes up these ads. "Were going to bring back jobs"  hes using my same language.
Heres the problem. They dont know where to begin. They dont know where to begin.
And if they did, Lyin Ted, lyin, he comes up. Did you ever see a guy like this? Just look what he did with Ben Carson.
Ben Carson, who endorsed me by the way, is a great guy, and Lyin Ted, remember in Iowa, he said "Ben has left the race. Hes left the race." This was on election day. Its not like two days before or the day after. "During the election, he left the race." Okay? And people believed him and thousands of votes were cast not for Ben but for Ted Cruz. Its pure deception. Its lying.
And then there were many other things. And actually during one of the debates, Marco Rubio looked over and he said, "Youre a liar." And I said, "You know, I never heard a politician call another politician liar so we can do it." So we now call him Lyin Ted  Lyin. Its crazy. Its crazy.
I mean, what he does and what he says is just terrible. And you know, Ive met a lot tougher people but Ive never met any human that lied as much as him.
And he comes in and you noticed the tremendous evangelical support I have? I have Jerry Falwell Jr. from Liberty University. I have all of these people. I have such incredible support.
And the evangelicals  he thought he was going to get the evangelicals but they dont like liars and they see he lies so much.
Do you ever see him  he walks up and he walks in with the Bible, held high. Right? Held high and then he starts to lie.
Boy, he is bad.
So anyways, I dont think that youre going to fall for that. I really dont think that anybody is going to fall  he doesnt talk. He debates...I said, "Ted, take it easy. Just talk. Talk. Talk."
But were doing really well. The whole thing is just working out. And I loved being here. You know, Ive been here for a long time. Ive been here for a long time. Im going here  were going to stay tomorrow. Were going to have some, I think Im doing Fox and Friends tomorrow morning. Im doing some shows tomorrow. Were going to do some shows and were going to be around and were going to make sure  we want to bring this home.
If we can  you know, we have a movement going on, folks. And its a movement of intelligence, actually. Its a movement of common sense. Thats all it is.
Were not going to let Carrier make air conditioners, fire all of its people, move to Mexico, make the air conditioners then come in and take the money out of the country. Its not going to happen anymore.


And Im a free trader. And they say, "Hes not a  " Remember Jeb Bush? "He is not a conservative." I said, "What?" I am a conservative. But you know what? I believe in free trade.
But when you have free trade, you need smart people running your side of the free trade.
If you dont have smart people or if you have people like Ted Cruz that are totally controlled by the people that give him the money and theyre controlled by the establishment. I mean, look at the establishment.
This guy in his whole life didnt know what the word establishment meant. Now you have all these people going because they said, "Oh man, Trump is terrible. He doesnt want any of our money."
I had one friend that came into my office  I dont think Ive ever said this before. He came into my office. He wanted to give me millions of dollars. I said, "I cant take your money. I dont want your money. Im self-funding." He said, "No, no, no, youve got to be kidding." He didnt even know. He thought I was kidding. He wanted to endorse me, wanted to support me. I said no, no, I dont want. Anyway, he was finally convinced that I didnt want his money and hes leaving. And I said, "By the way, what are you going to do now?" He said, "Im going to give it to another candidate." And I said, "Why?"
Theyre gamblers. They have to do it. Its like almost a disease. They have to do it. Its the craziest thing.
He loves me. He wants to give give me probably close to $10 million. Right? I would have had the greatest Super PAC in the history if I would have taken all the money.
And my whole life, you know, Ive said this before, my whole life as a business person is this. Right? Its okay. Nothing wrong with it. I take. I keep taking. I take and take.
But now Im going to take for the United States. Were going to take. Were not going to be the stupid people anymore. Were not going to be the stupid people anymore. We cant be. We cant be.
And with NATO when they dont pay, you know, I said  I was asked a question by Wolf Blitzer, a very fair question about NATO.
Now, you know, Ive been a businessman. World class. I filed my business papers. They were phenomenal. Everybody says great, great, great. I built a great company. Very little debt. Tremendous cash flow. Some of the greatest assets in the world.
And I tell you that only for one reason  thats the thinking we need in Washington. We need some of that thinking.
And Wolf Blitzer asked me a question on television. He said, "Let me just ask you about NATO." Now, I havent been asked about NATO a lot but I understand NATO and I understand common sense, and Im like a smart person like many of the people in this room. Hopefully all of the people in this room.
But he asked me about NATO. I said, "Its obsolete." This was my first thing.
And you know what? Im the first one.
Guys that study NATO and good people but they study NATO and they say, "I dont believe it. What he just said, I never thought of it." They study it because theyre so into it that they dont realize because it was really put there.
You had the Soviet Union and now you have Russia, which is different but Russia is powerful so we could sort of say thats a balance. So well leave it.
But it doesnt really cover terrorism like its supposed to. Doesnt have the right countries. I mean, many of the countries and there arent  that you associate with terrorism.
And so I said number one, its obsolete.
I said number two, to the best of my knowledge, the United States pay far too much proportionately and why are we always paying the bills to protect other people?
And the press, which is so totally dishonest, the press goes  headlines the next day  "Trump doesnt want NATO, wants to disband NATO". And thats not what I said.
I said, youve got to pay your bills. And you know what? If you cant pay your bills, honestly, there should be  theyve got to go because we cant do it. You know, this isnt 68 years ago. This isnt when it was originally formed like many, many years ago, many decades ago, and you have to re-do things.
But it is interesting. Some of the smartest people have said "What Trump said is genius. Its obsolete. And you know what? Its true." Theres a lot of people, a lot of countries being given a free ride. We cant have the free rides any more, folks.
...Thank you. Well, we need somebody with that...And its America first, folks. Its America first.
So then, as you know, North Korea is a big problem. North Korea is a problem. A problem that could be solved easily by China but they dont want to solve it because they want to tweak us. Theyre building in the South China Seas a massive military fort. You know whats going on. They shouldnt be doing that.
And theyre taking our money and, you know, you talk about the imbalance of trade, you talk about the kind of money. How about this? We owe China $1.7 trillion.
Now, they take our money. They take our jobs...Im not angry at China. Im angry at our people and our leaders for letting it happen.
Im not angry with China. If you can get away with it, you do it.
But they take our jobs, they take our money, they take our money. They take everything.
We owe them $1.7 trillion. Thats sort of like a magic act. Doesnt it? Amazing.
Japan, they send cars by the millions. They come off those boats. Los Angeles  I was there at the docks. I looked at the biggest boats youve ever seen. Biggest, greatest ships youve ever seen. The cars are pouring off the ships. We owe them $1.5 trillion.


Its like, well, how does this all happen? Okay? How does it happen?
Heres the story, folks.
Were going to change our thinking. Were going to be the smart people again. Were going to be so smart. Were going to be so sharp.
So a lot of people dont know we protect Japan. Do you know that? Does anybody know? You might know...We protect Japan. We protect Germany. We protect South Korea.
When you want a television set, who do you get it from? South Korea. Samsung. LG. You get it from South Korea.
So we protect all and big ships they make. These are monster, monster economies. We protect them.
They dont pay what they should be paying for not having to have this massive military apparatus that we supply.
And you know what? We get that because we have people that dont know what theyre doing in Washington for many years. I mean, Im not even blaming it  Obamas the worst. Hes the worst. The worst.
I mean, when he just realizes, I mean he just realized that the Iran deal is a bad deal. It just took him  realize  I said, "Oh, why didnt you listen to me two years ago?" Just two years ago if he would have listened  can you imagine? Did you ever see a deal take so long?
By the way, usually when a deal takes that long, its bad automatically. I can usually tell you that.
But anyway, so we protect Japan. So it comes out...I said, look, I would have to tell Japan and Im talking about other nations also because I have great friends from Japan, I have great friends from South Korea. We have to go see them, go to talk to, have a meeting with them, "We love protecting you." We dont want them to arm necessarily. But you know, at some point, how long are we going to do this?
So we have to see them and we have to say, "Youve got to help us out."
You know, we have this massive, massive amount of money that we have to get rid of because were sitting on one of the worst bubbles youll ever see. Okay? Believe me. Weve got to straighten it out.
Weve got to straighten out our trade deals. Weve got to straighten out our military deals. Were taking care of all these countries.
So we go to Japan. And heres what the...I was telling the people and they said "Wow, that sounds good." Weve got to take  youve got to take care of us.
Now, theyll probably say initially "No". And then we leave and then theyre going to say, "Yes."
But if they dont say yes, you always have to be prepared to make a great deal to walk. You have to be...
The problem with the Iran deal was that Secretary Kerry was like an amateur. Call him amateur night. He refused to walk. They were laughing at him in the streets of Iran. They were claiming the deal was the greatest deal ever made before it was even made. They were saying "This deal is unbelievable." They were laughing at the Secretary of State of this country. They were laughing at the United States saying that this deal is great. And they were dancing. Remember? Burning the flag dancing?
When they start dancing about a deal that Im making, when they start burning the American flag, Im out of there. Bye bye. Good luck.
And he just kept going back.
And I kept waiting. I wanted to call him. I wanted to call him. I wanted to say, "Walk." Because every single thing  hed say, "We would like to get this." "No!" "Oh, okay. Youve got it. We would like to get that." "No!"
You know, the Persians are great negotiators. Its an unbelievable deal.
But just yesterday, Obama just yesterday he brought it up that hes very unhappy.
I mean, think of it. Think of it. $150 billion. Its the worst deal. We didnt get our prisoners back. We should have had the prisoners back before we started negotiating. Increase the sanctions. Dont sit at the table. Say "You give our prisoners back or were not starting." You leave. Theyll say "No". You leave. And what happens? You double up the sanctions. Within 24 hours, they call you and they say, "Youve got your prisoners." That could have been years ago. Right?
So we have people that dont know what theyre doing.
Heres the story. You need Trump. You do. You need Trump. You bet...You do. I mean, youve got to have Trump.
I mean, its sort of interesting because I see when I turn on the television, I see these ads about myself by crooked people.
I see these ads and theyre mostly wrong. A little bit sometimes are right but theyre all negative. You know. And Im looking, Im watching this on television  ad after ad.
In Florida, they spent $38 million on negative ads and I won it in a landslide...Does anybody read? Does anybody watch television? You know, its not much for the advertising community when you think they spent $38 million  a record number in Florida.
They spent thousands and thousands of ads nationwide  listen to this one  55,000 negative ads on me. Most of them was made up.
Ill give you one good example.
We have the Club for Growth, which is forget them. These are among the dumbest people that youll ever meet.
They come to my office. They want me to give them $1 million.
A friend asked me, "Please see them." I said, "Who are they?" "Theyre Club for Growth." Whatever that means.
So they come to my office. They asked me for $1 million. I say, "No, thank you." And thats it.




Then they write me a letter, which I posted, asking me for $1 million. I said very nicely  Im not a bad person  I said nicely "No, thank you." I mean, you can be rich but you dont have to be stupid. Okay? Why am I going to give them $1 million?
So, what happens is all of a sudden I see their name all over the place  "Club for Growth" and they talk about, you know, different things  ridiculous things. I mean, theyre the worst ads.
And by the way, once was a fraudulent ad because they said, "If Cruz and Kasich got together and you added the delegates"  and they showed the delegates. Right? And you add them up  and Im over here with a lot. And they said  and they add them up and they show a graph that goes much higher than mine and its much lower than mine.
Theyre a fraud. And what we did is we told them to stop that ad and that was a week ago. And we tweeted about it. And everybodys talking about it. And I see it last night again.
Theyre crooked. So heres what they do. Its like a form of extortion, I guess. Right? When you think of it. They come to your office. They ask for $1 million. You dont give them $1 million. They go out. They do negative ads.
These are the people  you know, if these people about Trump  they call it like "No Trump". What do they call that thing? They call it "Never Trump". Oh, you need Trump so badly though.
I was saying if they would work, if they would have worked so hard, so diligently against President Barack Hussein Obama, they would have beaten him. They would have had great budgets. They would have had everything they wanted.
But with him...I always say, "Obama is the worst negotiator Ive ever seen." You look at the  no, except with the Republicans. He gets everything he wants.
I mean, you look at the omnibus budget from three months he got everything he wanted  fund Obamacare, bring people into the country that shouldnt be here. He got everything he wanted.
So he is the worst negotiator worldwide.
We have Sergeant [Bowe] Bergdahl. Right? We get Bergdahl, a traitor. No, no, think of it. This is a negotiation. We get Bergdahl. And they get  what do they get? Five of their most coveted killers that have been in jail for eight years in Gitmo, which were not closing down by the way. Okay? Were going to run it.
So we get Bergdahl, a traitor, who five or six  probably six  people were killed going out to try and get him back. He left. Hes a traitor.
So we get Bergdahl, and thats what we get. And they get five people that are right now back on the battlefield or soon to be back on the battlefield trying to kill everybody in sight, including us. Okay?
Weve got to stop it. Weve got to stop it.
So with Japan, I said they got to  maybe weve got to walk. And the next day the headlines  "Trump doesnt want to defend Japan", "Trump wants Japan to get their nukes".
Okay, heres the story, folks. You have Japan. Japan is very concerned with North Korea.
You know, number one, I like the way it is now but I want them to pay a lot more money. They probably will. But if they dont, its not so bad if they are at heads. Maybe were not supposed to get into that fight. Thats a bad fight. Maybe were not supposed to. Okay? Okay?
Same thing with South Korea. I mean, every time he raises his head and he starts talking, every single time he raises his head, our ships start floating over, our planes start going over. We do all sorts of exercise. What are we get out of this? We have 28,000 soldiers on the line.
So, we have to be taken care of.
Now, Im talking as a person financially. Okay? Im also talking militarily. But Im talking financially.
We dont have a country that can do this anymore.
Saudi Arabia, until the oil went down and now theyre still making a fortune. But Saudi Arabia was making $1 billion a day. We protect Saudi Arabia. If we werent there, Saudi Arabia wouldnt be there. If Saudi Arabia didnt have us for years protecting them, they would have been gone a long time ago as Saudi Arabia. Somebody else would have it, probably maybe Iraq because he would have come back.
And by the way, speaking of that, you know, I was against going into Iraq. Everyone says, "Oh, Trump is going to be very tough." I was against going into Iraq from the very beginning, from the very beginning.
And Im going to build our military bigger, stronger than ever before. But you know what? Hopefully, we never have to use it. Nobodys going to tell us what to do though. We have to shape it up because our military is totally depleted.
But if our politicians would have gone to the beach for the last number of years, many years, we would be much stronger in a sense. Wed be much stronger because the Middle East is a disaster. You see the great migration. Its a catastrophe.
You see whats going on in Germany. Its a total mess. What she has done.


Can you imagine? She was Person of the Year.
I was supposed to be Person of the Year on Time Magazine. She beat me out and she destroyed Germany. Can you believe this?
Thats not good. I wonder if Time Magazine had that one to do over again what theyd say. I think well be in much better shape. Well, theyve treated me nice. Ive been on the cover a lot.
And the reason were on the cover a lot is because we have a movement the likes of which people have never seen.
So heres the story. Heres the story.
You know, one of the great writers called me up and he said, "What youve done is incredible." I said, "No, no, I have to win." He said, "No, no, it makes no difference. If you win, if you lose, it doesnt matter. What youve done is down in the history books. You will be cover for all time. Its incredible." I said, "No, sir. No, sir. I have to win. Because if I dont win, to me, I will consider it a tremendous waste of time and waste of money but a tremendous waste of time."
So heres the story. Heres the story. Were going to take care of our Second Amendment. Its being chipped and chipped.
Were going to get rid of Common Core. Were going to bring education back locally.
Were going to repeal and replace Obamacare, which is a total catastrophe. Youre going to have great health insurance.
Were going to save your Social Security. Were going to save your Medicare. We are going to save it because we are going to make our country rich again. Were going to bring back our jobs. Were not going to let our jobs go. And were going to be able to afford  youve been paying in it a long time and a lot of these guys want it to be knocked to hell. Its not going to happen. Okay? Remember that. Its not going to happen.
Were going to start winning again, folks. We dont win anymore. We dont win anymore. We dont win with our military. We cant beat ISIS. Were going to win. Were going to knock the hell out of ISIS.
We dont win with our vets. Our vets are being treated worse than illegal immigrants. Our vets are being treated so unfairly. Theyre our great people.
And other people  you know, vets have endorsed me virtually unanimously and a lot of the vets will come up to me and say, "You know, Mr. Trump, we follow closely whats going on. Youre the only person that ever mentions the vets." Right?
And Hillary Clinton recently said about the vets that theyre being taken care of just fine. Theyre not being take care of fine. Theyre not being taken care of. She said theyre being taken care of just fine.
I know the vets. Nobodys spent more time with the vets that are running. And were going to take care of our vets. Okay?
We are going to tear up and make great and very lucrative and everybody is going to be happy, including the other side, trade deals.
I have the greatest people in the world for dealing.
We use political hacks that dont know what theyre doing. Theyre dealing against the smartest people in China, the smartest people in Japan, the smartest people from all over the world, and our negotiators are political hacks and were not using them anymore.
Were using the greatest business people in the world and we have them in this country and theyre endorsing me, and I know the best ones from the not so great ones. And were going to have great, great trade deals.


Were going to have a strong border. Were going to have a real border. Were going to have a wall. Mexico is paying for it. Were going to have a wall.
And were going to stop bad, bad things from happening in this country. Because if you look at whats going on and you look at the tremendous crime and you look at the drugs that are pouring across the border, its  the drugs are pouring like water. Theyre pouring across.
You know when I won  New Hampshire is a special place to me because they were the first victory I had. And I won New Hampshire, and I wasnt expected to win it; Jeb was expected to win it. And I won it in landslide.
And Id go around and Id see the people of New Hampshire, and they tell me, "Mr. Trump, our biggest problem is heroin." I said, "Heroin?" It doesnt make sense. You know, you look at the beautiful trees or the woods or the roadways and the lakes. I said, "Heroin?" It just doesnt work. Its incongruous. Right? It doesnt work. But it was heroin. And I said, "If I get in, were going to stop that problem." Then I said, "Where does it come from?" They said, "It comes from the southern border. They come right in."
Now, New Hampshire rated it their number one problem. They have a tremendous problem. But many other communities, including you, but many other communities have this problem. Were going to stop it cold, folks. Were going to stop it cold.
And the bottom line is this. Look, we have a big, big day. And youre going to look back on this evening and youre going to say that was one of the great evenings of your life because we love the country. We love the country.
...I love you too. Thank you.
Really do. I love the people. I love the people.
You know, they say Donald Trump  my base is so strong. They say, "Donald Trump can do almost anything." In fact, one person today said "Anything".
And they interviewed a woman, I saw her last night on television sitting in a hotel room, which was not the most beautiful room Ive ever been. It was very clean, and I only want clean. I dont care about the room. I want clean.
But they were sitting there and they said to a woman  a wonderful woman, probably 55 years old, and her friends were there. And they said, "What would it take to get you to vote for somebody other than Donald Trump?" She said, "Dont play that game. Theres nothing he can do that would get me to vote against him." And I wanted to go up and I wanted to hug that television set.
I wanted to  I wish I could find out who she is. But we have so many people like that. Were all like that. I mean, a big chunk of the country is like that because were tired of stupidity. Were tired of seeing whats happening to our great country.
So, heres the deal. Youre going to go home and youre going to remember this.
But much more importantly, tomorrow, you get everybody you can and I promise you. Youre going to be so proud of your country. Youre going to go out and vote. Youre going to be so proud of your president. But forget that. Youre going to be so proud of this country again.
And youre going to remember the evening because were going to start winning again. Were going to win on trade. Were going to win with our military. Were going to knock out the ISIS.
Were going to win. We are going to win with the military. Were going to knock out ISIS. Were going to knock them out.
Were going to win for our vets because our vets have been treated too badly. Its not going to happen anymore.
Were going to win at the border. Were going to win with education.
Were going to win with our Second Amendment. So many people talk to me about the Second Amendment.
Were going to win at every single element of what were doing. And every single thing were going to win, win, win.
And youre going to say, "That was the single greatest vote that I have ever cast", and youre going to look back and youre going to be proud of yourselves and youre going to be proud of your country again.
So thank you very much everybody. This is a great, great honor. Thank you!
Get out and vote! I love you all! Thank you! Thank you very much! Thank you!


Thank you. I feel so badly. Outside we have 5,000 people and they cant get in. I feel badly. I want to apologize. We have speakers outside. But I want to apologize. Who would have thought we have over 5,000 people cannot get in.
...Its an honor to be here. Its an honor to be with you. And very important. You know, were doing really well and millions of votes ahead of Cruz. Millions.
You know, I get a kick. I call him Lyin Ted. Lyin Ted Cruz. He stands up  and I win as you know, youve seen it. I have been winning all of the evangelical vote. But he stands up Bible high, puts it down and then he lies. You know, its amazing to watch it.
But he said, "Yeah, Im the only one who can beat Donald Trump. Ive done it time after time."
And I said, "Wait a minute. Ive won like most of the states."
I think he had like 5 or 6 and I had 20 or 22. Right?
And I said I cant believe it. And I have millions of votes more.
He says, "Im the only one that can out-vote him." And Im saying but I have like millions of votes more.
Ill tell you something so important. There is something happening. Its like a movement. Its incredible. Its a movement. And were part of the movement.
Not me. Im a messenger to be honest. Im a messenger.
And this is something thats so special and so amazing and its on the cover of time magazine. Its on the cover of every newspaper. Its something that has maybe never happened and theyre saying its phenomenon.
Sometimes they say Im a phenomenon. Im not. The message is what we want.
We want jobs. We want trade deals that are smart deals not stupid deals.
And you know, Wisconsin. I wrote down some notes...and its like devastating.
So [Scott] Walker came out today. I wrote down notes about Wisconsin.
Look, he certainly cant endorse me after what I did to him in the race. Right?
But look at this. By the summer of 2015, Wisconsin was facing a $2.2 billion two-year budget deficit. Thats terrible.
By the way, these are out of books. Like this isnt Trump. This is out of books.
Total state debt is $45 billion. Now, maybe somebody is going to tell me thats wrong but again these are  $45 billion. Very high. One of the higher ones.
20,000 fewer people in the labor force in Wisconsin than seven years ago even though population has grown by 100,000. So your population is higher.
Now, I wouldnt have done this but he endorsed Cruz. What am I going to do? Am I going to say hes doing a great job? Hes not doing a great job.
You know, he comes in with his big motorcycle jacket and big Harley. I love Harleys. Right? But the motorcycle guys like Trump. They really like Trump.
And he doesnt look like a motorcycle guy to me. Im sorry. Im sorry.
Unemployment rate  well, they say  that cant be possible. Unemployment  they have down 20%. That cant be possible. What? Is it 20%? Effective or regular? Effective unemployment rate 20%. Hey, this is out of the big book.
800,000 food stamp recipients.
Middle class hit very, very hard due to loss of manufacturing jobs. These are the stats. Right? You know about this, right?
It goes on and on.
Wisconsin has lost 15,000 net jobs to Mexico since NAFTA.
Now, just so you understand, Kasich is running also. We forget about him. He voted for NAFTA.
Both of them want TPP. TPP  Trans-Pacific Partnership. Both of them want Trans-Pacific. That will make NAFTA look like a baby, and Wisconsin will be hit so hard.
...


...But the motorcycle guys love Trump.
I love the disabled veterans and the veterans. Were going to take care of our veterans. You know that, right? Were going to take care of our veterans.
What is it about Trump that they like?
Im serious. We went to Hilton Head. We went to different places, and there were hundreds, hundreds of bikers out there. Beautiful bikes. Lots of Harleys, right? Lots of Harleys. Made in America. But beautiful, beautiful bikes...
I dont know what it is but they like me. I feel good with them. I feel safe. I got out took a picture. Secret Service went crazy.
I said, "These are great people. Dont worry about it."
But listen, I appreciate it, fellas, I appreciate it.
...Were going to keep you free. Im going to keep you free.
Because were getting rid of ISIS.
Were going to have good borders. Were going to have borders again. Were going to have borders again.
So here we have something thats pretty interesting  I love you too.
You lost 70,000 jobs to China. 70,000 jobs.
100,000 illegal immigrants living in Wisconsin. Taxpayers are paying tens of millions of dollars.
Look, I dont know. I dont know.
So what happened with Walker and I just will finish off with this  hes a nice man. He came up to my office like about a year ago before I did  you know, Ive been a politician for about eight months, right? I never thought Id be a politician. The last thing on my mind I want to be was a politician.
But I built a great company. I filed papers. The company is incredible. Very little debt, tremendous cash flow, some of the great assets in the world.
And I say that not in a bragging way. I say that because thats the kind of thinking we need, folks.
We cant have China ripping us off and Mexico and Japan and Vietnam. We cant have it. We cant have it. And they are ripping us like theyve never ripped anybody before.
Weve rebuilt China. I mean, were rebuilding Mexico.
You look the other day you saw Carrier moving down. Carrier Air Conditioning. I buy those air conditioners  a lot of them. Im not buying any more of them. But Carrier Air Conditioning moving to Mexico. Ford moving to Mexico.
Nabsico  home of the formerly wonderful Oreo which we dont eat anymore. Right? We dont eat it. We dont eat it. Number one, its a good  its called an enforced diet.
But you know what? Look, were losing our jobs. Look at your jobs.
When I see that statistic, I mean youre losing your jobs.
When I went after your governor when he decided to run and I said, "You know, Im going to be nice to him. Hes a nice guy." The guy came up to my office. He handed me a plaque because I supported him. What do I know? I supported him. I gave $50,000 or $100,000. Thats a lot of money for a guy youve never met before. Right? Thats pretty good.
But I like the fact that he was fighting, fighting, he was always fighting.
You know, to a certain extent, Id rather see somebody able to make a deal without having to go through all of that mess.
But he was fighting and I gave him a lot of money and he came up, you know, a year ago or so and he gave me a plaque. Beautiful picture of something. I havent  I never really got to read it to be honest. And I put it aside. That was it...
Because if we win Wisconsin, its going to be like over, pretty much over. Because were going to do great.
...Emerson poll came out. I think I have 67%, 68% in New York compared to like 10% or whatever, and you have Cruz talk about New York values, New Yorkers are no good.
I watched New Yorkers rebuild the World Trade Center. I watched New Yorkers dying.
Believe me, New Yorkers are good. New Yorkers are very good. But Cruz said theyre no good.
So anyways, so I think were going to do great in New York.
Were going to do great in New Jersey. Chris Christie endorsed me. Well do great in New Jersey. Good guy.
Ben Carson endorsed me. Sarah Palin endorsed me. Sheriff Joe from Arizona. We love Sheriff Joe.
And you know, with the evangelicals, Ive had so many ministers. Ive had so many pastors endorse me. And Jerry Falwell, Jr. endorsed me. It was incredible and weve done so well with the evangelicals. I mean, Christians, evangelicals, weve done so well.
In fact, in South Carolina, when we went to South Carolina, that was going to be Cruzs territory. He was going take it, except we won it in a landslide.


You know that. You saw it. He was there. This guy follows me around, Ill tell you.
But you were there. Remember, he was going to win that in a landslide. And then I started speaking. I started talking to people, and I started saying the good and the bad and the ugly.
And we won in a landslide and we won the evangelicals. Ive won just about I think almost every place Ive won with evangelicals.
And its been an amazing time.
So now Im here to talk to the people of Wisconsin. I have friends in Wisconsin. Ive been here before. Its an incredible place but its a place that has problems.
But you have a governor that has you convinced that it doesnt have a problem.
I remember when he was on the campaign trail, I was so nice to him. I said, "How can I hit him? Im not going to hit him. Im not going to hit him."
And I was so nice. I hit Jeb instead, right? Right?
And I hit Rand, Rand, old Rand.
And I hit a lot of people and they all went down.
Wouldnt it be nice to have a president that could just with his mouth make things happen that are positive? You know.
But its not with the mouth. Its really with the mouth, the heart, and the brain. Remember the brain.
I have a lot of friends. Theyre good with the mouth but theyre not good with the brain. It all doesnt work. Okay?
You know, we had an interesting thing today. A poll came out  a nationwide poll. A great poll. It was Trump 48%. It was an NBC poll. Trump 48%. Cruz was second in the 20s, mid-20s something. And Kasich was way down.
So what happened is they showed the poll. It was an NBC poll. They call it an NBC monkey poll. And it was on the Today Show, and it was on Morning Joe. Morning Joe held it up and he said, "Wow, those are great numbers."
48% is pretty good. You have three people. You know. I dont get enough credit for that.
Ive been at 42%, 44%, 45%, and Ive had like seven people. How do you get 45% when you have seven people? Nobody says that. They say, "He hasnt cracked 50%." How do you crack 50% when you have all these people running?
So Im at 48%. Poll was good  way, way ahead of anybody else nationwide. And they showed Hillary Clinton  hers is very close.
Shes got a little problem. Could happen. Got a bigger problem with the emails than she has with Bernie to be honest with you. She should have. Her bigger problem should be with emails. Well find out how honest our country is, right?
But shes got a sort of close race. And they put her poll up and it was put up there. You know, big letters.
And then they said, "And Donald Trump is winning." That was it. They didnt put numbers up. They didnt say Im doing great. In fact, they said, "Donald Trump is winning," and they put some  a little slightly negative statistic in  it was like wait a minute. They put her numbers up and they didnt put my numbers up.
Folks, its so unfair. The press is so dishonest. Its unbelievable. That was Chuck Todd. That was Chuck Todd this morning on the Today Show.
They put Hillarys numbers. And Im winning by a lot and they said, "Donald Trump is winning. You know, lets go to a new subject, okay?"
Now, I guarantee you one thing. If I was losing or doing poorly, itll still be up. Itll be up all morning because they dont like whats happening. Im self-funding my campaign. Im putting up my own money. They dont like it.
Ted Cruz and Kasich are getting money from the banking industries, the energy industries. Theyre getting money from the pharmaceutical companies. Theyre getting money from everybody.
Folks, you cant straighten out this mess  were in a mess  if you cant do what you have to do.
When millions of dollars are given to Cruz and Kasich and millions from different industries, youre not going to be able to say, "Well, were going to do and go against the banking industry to do whats right for the people" if the banking industry gave you millions of dollars. Now, thats true with Hillary also. Now, shes gotten millions of dollars.
But Im the only one self-funding my campaign. Im in for a lot of money. I in a lot of money.
What is beautiful is when I was running against Jeb in New Hampshire. I was in for like $2 million. Jeb was in for like $48 million. I was in first and he was close to last.
I said, "Who do you want as your president?"
By the way, did Jeb endorse anybody yet? Because I havent heard. Because I think Jeb probably endorsed  huh? Did he endorse? It just shows you how important it is. Nobody even knows. I dont even know.
Hell probably  hell endorse  just so you know. Look, when youre in war, youve got to fight and you fight hard.
When I fight, I win. Youre going to win. You know that. Youre going to win.


But you know, you do pretty serious damage, right? Because you want to win and you want to win fast and a lot of people dont love you after you finish.
But I just love you. I dont care about that.
In fact, theyre asking Cruz, you know, at the debate which by the way they said I won every single debate. Now I heard the other night, "I want to debate Trump". Ive debated him 11 or 12 times. Every single online poll has me winning the debates. Hes an okay debater but hes a bad talker. You know, everythings so dramatic.
And he waits. Phony. And he waits. You know, you ever see he goes sentence after sentence and then he stops for like three, four seconds. And then he goes again. It looks like were in the theater. Were not in the theater. Were in the real world.
So what happens  thank you.
...By the way, the Sheriff is here and hes a great guy and his people are fantastic. Thank you, Sheriff. Thank you.
I mean, the only thing I feel so guilty about all the people outside. Feel so guilty. Were going to come back. Were going to come back, come back to this area. You guys cannot come. Okay? All of the ladies can come but the guys cant.
But all of the people outside, were going to take a bigger place because I feel slightly guilty.
But look, we have a very serious mess on our hands. We have a very serious situation.
We have a country thats not protected.
We have a country thats sitting on a big fat bubble thats going to explode. In a certain way, Id say let it do now, dont do it after I get in. Three days itll explode and theyll say its Trumps fault. Okay?
Ayeyeye, we are in a big fat ugly bubble. We have interest rates that are so low that if youre rich like me I can borrow money for any amount. If youre a hardworking guy with a great farm or youre a hardworking developer or businessman you cant borrow money.
You can only borrow money really cheaply  think of how bad it is  you can borrow money for nothing practically if youre rich. But if youre rich, you dont need the money so you dont have to borrow it.
But if youre a businessperson and you want to go to the bank for a loan, you cant get it.
The regulators are running the banks. Dodd-Frank is a disaster, by the way. Its a disaster. Its a disaster.
But the biggest disasters are regulations. Our rules and regulations are horrible. Were going to get rid of probably 85% of them. There are some we live with. But weve got to go back.
So many people in this area have told me regulations  regulatory climate  is the worst theyve ever seen.
I have a friend, whos a farmer, and if a puddle forms, they consider it a lake for the purposes of environmental. Its like a puddle and theyd consider it a lake.
So we dont know what were doing. So heres whats happening. Were going to make our country so great again. Were going to make our country so strong again.
Our military is going to be so amazing. Were never going to have to use it.
Dont forget, I didnt want to go into Iraq. All these guys think that Im a tough guy so Im going to be so quick with the trigger. Im not going to be quick.
I was the slowest with the trigger. I didnt want the trigger.
Now, when Obama left though, he shouldnt have left the way he did. He gave a certain date, and the enemy said, "It cant be possible. Nobody would be that stupid. Nobody."
So I actually dont think itd hurt that much because I dont think the enemy would ever believe that anybody would be stupid enough to give a date  "Were leaving on this date." And then he left. They said, "He was serious!" They pulled back. They pulled back. Then you see what happened. They pulled back then they went in with fury.
But how about the 50 soldiers. He sent a couple of months ago, a few months ago, he sent 50 of our finest and instead of just sending them quietly, quietly sending them. What does he do? He sends them in and he makes a big press conference or announcement that "We are sending 50 soldiers in Iraq, Syria" and these soldiers have a big target on their backs.
Why cant we just keep our mouths shut? Why cant we be unpredictable? Unpredictable? Right? Why cant we be unpredictable?
Why does he have to tell  first of all, it doesnt even sound good when you say "50 soldiers" because it sounds like so small. People would say, "Is that good or bad?" I mean, that sounds small.
But then when you think about it, why do we have to say that?
These are extraordinary people. These are our finest. And theyre, you know, very dangerous missions. Why would you tell people that were sending them in? You just keep quiet and let them accomplish something.


They are right now  who knows whats happened to them? But right now, they have a big target on their back.
People that weve let go of at Gitmo have now killed Americans. Youve seen that. You saw that yesterday. That came out yesterday. We let people go out of Gitmo and they kill Americans. Okay. Is anybody surprised at that though? Would anybody be surprised?
And were keeping it open. Now theyre spending, you know, hundreds of millions to run it. I guarantee you could run it a lot cheaper. Youd have a lot of money left over.
So were going to get efficiency in government. But were going to end Obamacare. Were going to replace it with something so much better and so much less expensive.
Were going to get rid of Common Core. Were going to bring our education local.
We are going to preserve our Second Amendment. Its under siege. Its totally under siege.
And Christianity is under siege. Ill tell you, Christianity is under siege.
You take a look. Im with the  Ill tell you what. Ive been with so many pastors lately and Jerry Falwell Jr. was an example  was telling me that  first of all, he told me something that "You remind me so much of my father." I thought his father was a great guy. What his father did with Liberty College and Liberty University. And Jerry to top it off has taken it to a whole new place.
But when Jerry was so strong and so great.
But I was talking to  I probably had 50 of the ministers and pastors, different folks came up to my office, and theyre really under tremendous pressure because they dont want to have their tax exempt status taken away. This happened during the Lyndon Johnson presidency.
And I said, "Why is it that you folks are pushed around so much?" Christianity. These are the pastors. These are strong people. These are really strong people. "Why do you allow that? Why arent you more forceful?"
And finally, somebody said, "Well, we have to be a little careful of our tax exempt status."
I said when did that happen exactly? It was during the Johnson.
Well, were going to try to get rid of that. Okay? Because thats really terrible.
Were going to try getting rid of  and Ive said that to a lot of evangelicals, a lot of great Christians. Were going to try to get rid of it because it sort of means somebody walking down the street has more power than somebody of religion, of our religion, of Christianity, somebody thats an evangelical.
You take anybody they have more power because these people are powerless.
Theyve actually taken their right of free speech away.
So I said were going to try to get rid of that and I think well be very, very successful.
You know, its interesting. I said how many Christians are there? Because you know, weve got men, weve got women. You cut it in half, weve actually have a few more women. But we are far more Christians than we have men or women. So in a way, its the most powerful lobbyist  the biggest group of people.
But theyre not allowed to talk because theyre petrified.
You saw what was happening with the IRS and what was taking place with regard to certain groups.
So we are going to try and usually when I say try that means Im going to get it done. That means Im going to get it done.
But we are going to try very hard. We are going to get that brought back and I think its going to be very hard to counter it.
Because if the Christians, and if the whole evangelical Christian sector gets together, nobody, nobody can beat 
You know, when I made the statement about banning Muslims on a temporary basis, I took such heat.
Now people are saying, "You know, Trump is sort of right about that." Now theyre all going, "Wow" because they see whats happening.
And I think if I would have said it about Christians, I think I would have had less opposition. Thats whats happened in this country. Thats whats happened in our country.
And we cant let it happen. Were going to turn this country around and were going to be the smart people. Were not going to be the dummies anymore.
Were not going to be where China made last year trade deficits $505 billion. Japan over $100 billion. Mexico $58 billion.
Were going to build a wall and Mexico is going to pay for the wall. Okay?
...Recently, I was in Florida and Marco, whos a nice guy actually. You notice how nice they are after youve defeated them?
I like everybody I defeat.
But when I ran against Marco, it was supposed to be...well, he started it. Right? Just like Cruz started the last deal. He started it.
But Marco came after me very viciously. You know he wanted to be Don Rickles, right? And it didnt work.
But what happened is I won by 20 points  almost 20 points  and a lot of these issue we were talking about it was big issues. And frankly, I wish I would have left about two days earlier. I wanted to stay in Florida campaign. I wish I would have devoted two more days to Ohio because I almost won in Ohio. I would have won in Ohio but I didnt want to take a chance leaving my beautiful Florida because I love Florida and I wanted to win that.


So if I would have left a couple of days early, I think I would have won Florida the same.
But Im not going to have anything happen in Wisconsin. We have to win.
If we  look, we have to put these politicians in their place, folks. Its time.
And believe me, you know, Cruz likes to pretend hes an outsider and in the meantime he gets all the establishment support, including your governor.
So believe me, believe me, theyre all establishment.
And frankly in a way its worse because Cruz is establishment and yet hes got no relationship with the establishment.
He goes and he stands on the floor of the Senate for a day and a half and he filibusters, and these Senators  look, I know. Theyre tough cookies. I have the best  I have one of the great people  Sen. Jeff Sessions, whos great.
Nobody better than Jeff.
And you know, Cruz thought he was going to have him and used him in his speech  "Sen. Jeff Sessions"  and then he comes out and he endorses me.
But when you think of it, look, out of all of these Senators, he has one supporter  Lee  whos his friend. I mean, hes his friend. And by the way took him plenty time to do it.
But you know, to stand there and to rant and rave for two days to show people you can filibuster, in the meantime, nothing was accomplished.
Cruz has not accomplished one thing.
So hes an insider but its almost like the man on the street because he cant get anything done.
He dislikes people. He calls people like for instance he said horrible things about the Speaker and you know about the Speaker and he said about separately Mitch McConnell.
I mean, he said some terrible things about  how do you get things done when youre calling Mitch McConnell bad names. Okay? Lets just say bad names.
So hes sort of got the worst of all elements. Hes an insider totally but he can get nothing done. Okay? He can get nothing done.
Your new Speaker  how do you like Paul Ryan? How do you like him?
Wow. I was told be nice to Paul Ryan because  really?
Well, hes the Speaker. Hes a nice guy. He called me the other day. He was very nice.
But Im very surprised at this statement. Wow. Are you all Republicans? Are you mostly conservatives?
...I always say Im just a common sense conservative. And so, so important  common sense.
And somebody told me today that somebody else  I think, Walker  used my term.
You know, Walker used  I said, "Make America great again." I said, "Make America great again", and I copyrighted the term.
And then Walker was making a speech many months ago when he first started and he was saying "Make America great again" because he saw the response that I got. The difference is he didnt get any response. So then no.
But we told him he cant do that. That was the first real problem I had with him...
Now, I said a common sense conservative and today I heard he used the term because the press was up and they interviewed me and they said he said hes a common sense conservative.
Well, I coined the phrase a few months ago. Thats what I am. I am a conservative.
Im very, very conservative on the military. Im very conservative with our vets and on health care and on lots of things.
But  and Im actually very conservative on trade but a lot of people would say "Hes not that conservative on trade because he doesnt believe in free trade." Well, actually I do believe in free trade. But its got to be good trade for us, right? Its got to be smart trade.
It cant be where Wisconsin is losing thousands and thousands of jobs where you folks cant get into China but China comes in here like its Swiss cheese. Thats what happens.
You know, China does not obey the rules.
Now, I get along great with China. I made a fortune dealing with China. I have two buildings because of China. Big ones in New York and one in San Francisco  Bank of America  that I have in partnership with a great company. And its because of China. I sell  I have one of the big leases with one of their big banks  with the biggest bank in the world actually from China.
I sell millions of millions of condos to people from China. I like China.
Im not angry China. I like them. I think their leaders are doing a great job for them.
But our leaders are doing a bad job for us.
Same with Mexico. I get along great. The Hispanics. I love the Hispanics. I love the Hispanics. But their leaders are killing us on the border and theyre killing us on trade.
And Im not angry at them. Im angry at our country and our leadership because its grossly incompetent and were going to change it around and were going to get the best and were going to get the finest.


...So whatever you can do to spread the world, Ill be around. Im going to Green Bay. I love their team, by the way. You talk about a great franchise. No, I love it.
And you have a truly great quarterback. I dont know. Hes probably endorsing somebody else but I dont care. Hes still a great quarterback.
Tom Bradys a friend of mine. He said you have a great quarterback. Thats all right with me. When Tom says hes a great quarterback thats pretty good.
But you know, I really want to win Wisconsin because if we could win Wisconsin, were going to put all of this stupidity away.
Were going to put these stupid, stupid people that allow and Im talking about basically politicians, and in many cases, you know a lot of times people will see deals that are done and I mean take a look at the Iran deal. How bad is that I mean, just as a deal...
But many times people will say deals that the country makes, and theyll say, "How can our politicians be so stupid?" Theyre not stupid. Theyre being hit by the lobbyists and the special interests and they make a fortune. Okay? They get tremendous campaign contributions. Theyre not stupid. Theyre doing it for themselves.
So again, Im not doing that. Im doing for you. Im working for you.
But just remember, theyre not so stupid like you think.
But when you look at the people funding Cruzs campaign and Kasichs campaign, and you look  dont forget  Cruz said, "Oh the banks, the banks." You know, hes going to be Robin Hood. Hes going to be this great guy.
And then in her personal financial disclosure form, he forgot to mention that he borrowed about a million dollars from the banks  Citibank and Goldman Sachs. He borrowed a million dollars at an interest rate that everybody in this room would be proud to have  a very low interest rate. Almost no interest. He forgot to announce it on his personal financial disclosure form. He just forgot. He said, "Oh, I forgot. I forgot."
Okay? So then he hits the banks. Hes controlled by these people, folks. Okay? I mean, what he did was absolutely wrong. But theyre controlled by these people.
Im controlled by you. Im going to do the right thing for you. Okay? So remember that.
...
Q&A






22 veterans a day commit suicide. Thats correct.






Were going to take care of our veterans so much. Look, let me tell you, they  many of them kill themselves waiting for a doctor. They cant even get to see the doctor. You know that. They end up killing themselves before they see the doctor.
22 a day and a lot of people dont even believe that number. They think its almost like an impossible number  how can it be so bad?  and it actually could be even worse than that.
We are going to take care of them. From their standpoint, they wait, they wait, then they get bad service, then they wait some more  six, seven, eight days.
And sometimes theyll see the doctor and the doctor says, "I cant see you now. Im going on vacation."
You see the corruptness.
I just left Phoenix  21,000 people. Sheriff Joe was there. The job he did was incredible. Incredible.
You know they had a little protest. Right? That protest ended so quickly. He arrested three people; everyone else scattered.
You know, and you have that kind of a Sheriff here. You have a tough cookie here. I can tell you. I just met him and I can tell you.
But you know I have a great policy plan and Ive gotten a lot of credit for it and its on DonaldJTrump.com. And with the veterans when theyre waiting for exorbitant time  even for a little time  theyre going to go to the doctor. Theyre going to go to local doctors or local hospitals.
Many of the hospitals are dying for business. You know that theyre dying. Some of these hospitals are dying. Theyre going to get immediate treatment, immediate service, were going to pay the bills, and were going to save a fortune, and theyre going to get great service.
And everybody is in love with it. Everybody loves it. And thats whats going to happen. So were going to take care of our veterans.
If we cant take care of our veterans, we cant take care of anyone. So were going to take care of our vets.






Boy, do you look good though. You look good and tough. I wouldnt want to fight you.
Do you think I can take you in a fight? I dont think so.
How about we do it right now? That would be great for television...
Go ahead.






...Let me tell you this. Our veterans are taken worse care of than illegal immigrants who come in our country...You dont even have to write it down. Were going to do things about it.
You know what youre saying? Ive heard this so many times before with the daycare and everything else. We are going to take care of our vets.






By the ways, speaking of increase, Cruz and Kasich want to destroy your Social Security, folks, okay?
I want to bring money back into this country. I want to bring jobs into this country. I want to bring tremendous wealth into this country. I want to take our wealth back from China, from Mexico, from all of these countries that have our wealth. Theyve taken them like were a bunch of babies.
And were going to save your Social Security and were going to save your Medicare. They want to get rid of it. Okay? Remember that.
...
I want to use not too many executive orders folks. You know, because executive orders came about more recently. Nobody ever heard of an executive order.
Then all of a sudden Obama, because he couldnt get anybody to agree with him and he start signing them like theyre butter.
So I want to do away with executive orders for the most part.
But look, just do me a favor. Stick with me. Youre going to be okay. All right?
...I know, what youve said Ive heard a hundred times and daycare is a huge problem. Huge problem. And your wife not working? Huge problem  she cant. So anyway, I bet you have a great wife. Good wife? Better believe it.






...Were ending Common Core. Youre not going to be educated  your kids in Wisconsin are no longer going to be educated in Washington, D.C. by bureaucrats  many of whom  I cant say all  but many of whom dont care for your kids. They couldnt care less. They get big, fat salaries. Your kids are going to be educated locally.
Were terminating Common Core, and you will see something thats magic. And Ive seen it where parents and all of these people  the uncles, the aunts  theyre all on the school boards. They get professionals. They have great principals.
You cant see whats going on from Washington, D.C. Many of the people never even come here. They sit behind their desk in Washington. They draw big salaries. And theyre telling you how to educate their kids. Not going to happen that way.
And Ive even seen it where they keep graduates  the child graduates and those parents stay on. They love it because their child went through the system. They love it and they become so good at it. Thats whats going to happen.
Were one of the worst in the world in education. Were going to be one of the better ones. Not necessarily  you know, I dont know that were going to beat Sweden, Norway, Denmark, and China. But were going to come very close.






Discipline in schools. I dont think that Wisconsin should have a big problem with discipline. You have a big problem with discipline?
...Well, we have to get discipline back in the country, forget about school. We have to get discipline 
I mean, I have a case. I have a wonderful guy  campaign manager. You talk about discipline. And you probably saw what happened today with my campaign manager. Hes a good guy. Corey [Lewandowski].
And by the way, the easiest thing  "Corey, youre fired." I cant do that. Cant do it.
So fortunately, I have a taping system. You know, very  Im rich so I have tapes all over.
So this young woman who complained, was all  she was talking about being maybe thrown to the floor and all this. I said, "Oh, thats horrible." And then we saw the tapes.
Did anybody see the tape? What did you think? Right? Nothing.
Women  what did you think? [Audience response inaudible]...
I mean, she wasnt like  her face stayed the same.
If somebody squeezed your arm or did something really bad  dont forget  initially she said thrown to the floor. But if somebody squeezed your arm or hurt you, wouldnt you start screaming or something?
Did you see any change in her face? [Audience response inaudible]
...Its horrible. Its horrible. Honestly, its horrible.
And the best thing I could do is say  but I cant destroy a man. Id destroy him. Got a beautiful wife and children and Im not going to destroy a man for that.
And you know what? When I saw that at the tape, at first I said, "Oh, this is terrible." Then I saw the tape. Its my tape. Im the one that had the tape. Its on the ceiling of this incredible club in Jupiter, Florida, and were all leaving and we have a press conference. Right?
And the press conference lasted a long time. It was like 45 minutes. So that was enough.
Im leaving with a whole big gang of people. People pushing left and right, left and right.
And all of a sudden, she bolts into the picture. She grabs me or hits me on the arm. In fact, Im like this with my arm up and then he goes by and maybe he touched her a little bit. But I didnt  it was almost like he was trying to keep her off me. Right?
[Audience response inaudible]
Like he was helping her. And did you see her fall to the ground?
[Audience response inaudible]
Okay, because she talked about falling to  now after, I must tell you, her statement changed big league because she said go to the ground. You know, all this. I could read it to you. Does anybody want to hear it?
I mean, I want to be accurate because Id like the press to treat me.
So before she knew she was on tape, she said "I was jolted backwards."
Was she jolted backwards? I mean, if she was, her face stayed the same. I mean.
"I was jolted backwards. Someone grabbed me tightly by the arm and yanked me me down. Campaign managers arent supposed to forcefully throw reporters to the ground, except she never went to the ground. She never even came  flinched.
She didnt  you know, if somebody grabbed you even one of the guys, even the bikers, if somebody grabs even a biker or punches you a little bit, youre "Whoa!" Right? I mean, the toughest guy, the toughest woman. Look at her face. Its zero.
Theyre going to destroy a mans life?
And then I have Cruz saying, "Oh, that was a terrible thing. That was a terrible thing."
Let me tell you something, folks. If I win, if I lose, I didnt need to do this. Im doing this because I just had a beautiful grandchild with Ivanka. Ivanka and Jared  beautiful, beautiful grandchild. Its my eighth. Im doing this all for them.
I didnt need to do this. This is not so easy. And I had no idea. You know, maybe none of us did. You know, I had no idea the message was going to get across. Its a message of competence. It really is. Its a message of common sense and its a message of competence.
And I had no idea that wed have millions of more votes than we had when we had that stiff Mitt Romney  a total stiff  who by the way hes a dope. Hes not a smart person. Ill tell you right now.
Let me tell you about Mitt Romney. That was an election he should have won and he lost. And he should just go away and let the big boys do it now because you know what? Thats an election that should have been won.
And Ill tell you what. I helped John McCain and at that time, honestly, that was a tough deal for him because the world was sort of collapsing. But he lost.
And I helped Mitt Romney a lot and he lost. And I said, "This time, were going to do it ourselves. Were going to win. Were going to win." So just remember that.
Were going to win because of Wisconsin, I hope...








Right! Shes so smart. I dont want them to know. I dont want to tell Putin what Im thinking. Shes so smart.
What you just said...what about Ukraine? Dont worry about Ukraine. Ukraine is going to be fine. Just dont ask me why.
You know, this world of politics  "Mr. Trump, you said -" dont forget Im the one that said take the oil. I was right. They didnt take the oil. You know who has the oil right now? ISIS has the oil.
You know, that Libya  ISIS has all that oil from Gaddafi, all of that big oil from Gaddafi. He took it. Were like a bunch of dummies.
Why arent we embargoing? Why arent we creating a nice big circle so they cant get the oil out? Why arent we taking that oil back?
Look, look, look, Im the one that says though I dont want to say everything.
If I win, I have a good chance of winning. Im the frontrunner by a lot. I want to go in there. I want to knock the hell out of ISIS. I dont want to tell all. I really mean this.
I dont want to tell everybody in this room  and look at all the cameras that are going now  I dont want to tell the world what Im going to do because theyre watching.
Just let me do it folks. I will do it. You would be so happy. You dont have to know the details. Okay? Let me do it.
You know, I used the word before. We have to be a little bit unpredictable. We cant say, "Well, were going and attack on March 14th and then were going to hit them from the front and then were going to hit them from the back."
You know, Obama did that eight months ago with one of the cities. He said, "Were going in next week."
Look, folks, folks, folks, you know, you have to trust  there has to be some trust. Right? Do you trust?
Weve got to stop the stupid. Thats why I really think your question is so great  "I dont want to hear how youre going to do it, Mr. Trump. Just do it." Ill do it. Okay?
I love that. That woman! That woman! Thank you, honey. Thank you.


Okay. I can see why.
Woman:
Thank you. You have been  I just want to say thank you. You saved me in so many ways.
In recent years, Ive been struggling with an incurable illness and Im on home care now. Its caused by a doctors medical negligence.
And in those dark days fighting  right now all the tubes have been removed and I have a Do Not Resuscitate Order and I have a seven-year-old son  in those days in the hospital, I received from you a handwritten letter that said, "To the bravest woman I know."


I remember that. I remember that. Such a wonderful, beautiful woman. I mean, just an amazing woman.
And are you coming along okay?
Woman:
No, sir. But thats okay because Im here right now to thank you in person and that was my biggest dream.
And I wanted to thank you because through you and your organizations, my son whos Mexican-American, seven-years-old, through your organization and just being able to stand on that stage with you back in 2005 the outpouring of love that can from that ultimately provided my son when he graduates high school with a full ride to college.


Thats great. And you know what well do? Were going to watch him. Youre going to watch him. Were going to be watching your boy. Okay? But youre going to be hopefully around. Youre not going to have to have anybody watching. Youre going to hopefully be around. Those doctors are going to be so wrong. But well be helping you.
Woman:
So we thank you. God bless you. And just, you know, hes a Mexican-American, and you because of your efforts have sent him to college. And I have been writing letters to him for when Im in heaven to tell him that what youve done for him now he has a great responsibility to pay it forward just as you have done for us.


Thats so nice. Thank you.
I have to go down and say hello. Is that okay?


...Very sad but I think its going to be really a story of hope and something that is really great is going to happen out of that. You watch.
But it sort of tells me when I first said this people would say, "Oh, it will cost a lot." Forgetting about the campaign. Thats peanuts by comparison. You know, Ive spent tens of millions of dollars.
But the big thing  I lost certain businesses and I owned the Miss Universe Pageant. I bought it very inexpensively many years ago  15 years ago  and because of the fact that they thought I was against this woman or that one, I had a hard time with television.
Now, the good news is I sold it for a wonderful  I was very happy with that. But I didnt want to sell it. But I sold it and I built it to really a great company. We did a great job with that company  Miss Universe, Miss USA, Miss Teen USA.
But other businesses  I sort of  like the shirts and the ties with Macys. Macys was unbelievably disloyal because of illegal immigration and they ended the shirts, ties. Who care? I mean, thats not a big deal.
But Im doing something  nobody is giving up what Im giving.
I mean, when Cruz runs, he runs. If he wins, great. If he loses, great. You know, its him. Hes a politician. They just  they run, they win, they lose, who knows?
But these guys run for office. Thats all they do.
Ive always heard that if youre a very successful person, you cant run for office, especially for president. You just cant run for president, and I can see it. I have so much false press about me. Things that are so false.
You know, I saw the other day on television, there were like 56,000 negative ads on me. 56,000.
In fact, in Florida, I own Doral and in Florida we had the tournament there two weeks. Adam Scott  the great Adam Scott  the great golfer. He was winning. And in between shots, I told you this after the victory speech, in between they have commercials and they were all about Trump. Negative, horrible, negative commercials. Mostly false. Mostly. Not all false. But mostly false, I have to be honest.
But it came out the other day, I think it said "$68 million, 55,000 negative ads." Negative ads.
And when I was running in Florida, I said "How is it possible to win?" I mean, with all of this because I knew it. You couldnt turn on in Florida where I was you couldnt turn on the television without seeing Trump commercials. Sometimes four or five in a row. And they were horrendous. Done by very, very bad people. Very bad, evil people.
And I said, "How it is possible to win?"
And God helped me. Honestly. Because I won in a landslide. I won by almost 20%.
And now theyre doing it here. Club for Growth. Its a crooked outfit.
Look, Club for Growth  you ever hear this? Club for Growth  a friend of mine, hes a conservative guy. He goes would you do me a favor? See Club for Growth. I said, "Whats Club for Growth?" He said, "They want to talk to you." I said, "All right. Send them up." Hes a friend. Hes a good guy. And now Im in politics so I have to see people I wouldnt normally...
So Club for Growth, they come up to my office. This guy was I think a former Congressman. And he tells me a little bit about Club for Growth and Im falling asleep. And then he goes, "$1 million." And I said, "$1 million for what? I dont even know you. Ive never met you." I said, "Do me a favor." Im trying to be nice and I said, "Go back and write me a little note if you can." And he was stupid enough to write me a note.
He writes me a letter asking for $1 million. I let him know that Im not interested. You could be rich. Id rather take a million and throw it all over this room. Id rather give it to you, to your boy.
...They write me a letter. Its like extortion. They asked me for a $1 million. I said no nicely. And then theyre doing ads all over Wisconsin. Club for Growth. They did it all over Florida. Club for Growth. About eminent domain.
By the way, without eminent domain, you wouldnt have highways, you wouldnt have hospitals, you wouldnt have bridges. You need eminent domain. If somethings in your way and youre building a highway, if youre producing 7,000 jobs and you need a little corner of someones property, every once in a while.
You know, its funny. These guys all want the Keystone Pipeline. Right? Everyone. Conservatives. Conservatives want the Keystone Pipeline. I like the Keystone Pipeline too. But they have a whole big thing on eminent domain in their prospectus because without eminent domain, they wouldnt go 15 feet. They wouldnt be able to build it.
So, they dont want eminent domain. They do commercials about eminent domain. They love the Keystone Pipeline, and the whole Keystone Pipeline is based around eminent domain because youve got to go from Canada, where Cruz was born, to Texas, where hes representing. Think of it.
This guy  and dont forget that. Remember what I said. Im going to win. Just remember what I said. Im going to win. And I thank you...
Im going to win. But remember this. If for some reason he does, he gets the nomination, the first thing  remember, Im a good prognosticator, Im a good predictor  the first thing thats going to happen is the Democrats are going to sue Ted Cruz. He was born in Canada. He lived there for four years. The head of the Harvard Law School, one of the top people in the business in terms of Constitution, is saying that, you know, hes wrong. And we have a bunch of other people that are much stronger than even that.
Remember this. If Cruz gets lucky and wins, and the only way he can get lucky is if he doesnt get  because its all establishment. You know, if I go into that whole mess of the convention, Im not the establishment. I dont take their money. I dont hire their people. I dont do any of that stuff. Okay? So you have a disadvantage.
But if Cruz wins, remember what I said. Just remember. Again, hes not going to win. But if he does, he gets the nomination, within the first few days he will be sued by the Democrats that he doesnt have the right to be president. And I think theyre right because he wasnt born on our soil. He wasnt born. Hes not a natural born citizen. Hes not a natural born citizen.
I dont like to make a big deal of this but it was just brought up by somebody. He is not a natural born citizen. So if for some reason he should get the nomination, I really believe youre wasting your time and boy do we have a problem because youre going to have somebody thats going to be sued, probably will lose the lawsuit.
Again, he was born there, lived there for four years, mother was there, the whole thing for a long period of time, and he was a Canadian citizen joint with U.S. until 14 or 15 months ago. Did anyone know that? So he was a senator from Texas, only because of the great Sarah Palin by the way, without Sarah Palin, he could have never won that election. It was a fluke. But he was a Senator from Texas. He lived  he was a joint citizen. Now, he finally gave up his citizenship to Canada like 16 months ago. He said, "Oh, I didnt know I was a citizen of Canada also." Just like he didnt know that Goldman Sachs and Citibank gave him money. I mean, this guy is  you just have to study him, folks.
Look, again, Im doing this. Were going to win. Were going to turn this country around. Were going to make America great again. Were going to win a lot. But you have to know the facts.
I love you all. I love you all. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. Get out there and vote! Thank you!




Thank you. Thank you! Thank you very much everybody. This was an amazing evening. This was a great evening.
They just announced North Carolina.
I dont know if theyve even announced Illinois yet but were leading by a lot so I think theyre going to announce it.
Florida was so amazing.
And I want to thank our friends. Northern Marianas Islands have been so incredible, and we picked up nine delegates this morning. I heard very early in the morning  nine delegates. Thats a lot.
And I just wanted to thank the governor, Ralph Torres, great guy, Chairman [James] Ada who was a fantastic man and that was a very nice start to the day. That I can tell you.
Many things have been happening over the last short period of time.
CNN was very nice. They came up with a poll. The poll said 49% to 14% and 15%.
We just had one from the Economist just came out  53%.
And it was sort of interesting because I was watching the news a little while ago and one of the commentators, who Im not particularly fond of but these are minor details, said "But Donald Trump doesnt get over 50%" because Im at 43%, 45%.
Actually now according to the Economist, Im at 53%.
And I have to explain to these people they dont understand basic physics, basic mathematics, basic whatever you want to call it. When I dont get over 50%, we have four people. Right? We have four people. Do you understand that?
So when I get 53%  and this one is an example, I had 53% and thats with four people. Thats an achievement just mathematically when you can get over 50%.
So someday, someday theyre going to understand, someday when we take it all, theyll understand. But it is really ridiculous.
I want to thank my family. My boy, Eric and Don. Theyve been working so hard.
Ivanka and Jared have been amazing. Ivankas home right now. In about two minutes, Ill call her. Shes about to have a baby so I dont know. Weve been thinking about that now for a little while but Ivanka has been so helpful and Jared has been amazing and its been just great.
I want to thank Barron for putting up with the fact that I never see him anymore. And I want to thank Barron. I never see my Barron and its his birthday on Sunday so were very happy about that.
So its a little tough. You know, were going away and he goes, "When are you going to be come home, daddy? When are you coming home?" I said, "Well, in about two and a half weeks." Its been pretty tough.


Youre traveling all over the place. Its really amazing. Yesterday I went up to Ohio. I went up to Youngstown.
We had an incredible crowd and just amazing people in this country. We have so, so many great people.
We will someday in the not so distant future if I win  otherwise its not going to happen I have to be honest with you. But Apple and all of these great companies will be making their product in the United States, not in China, Vietnam and all of 
And were not going to be losing our companies. You know, our companies are leaving our country rapidly, rapidly, whether its Carrier air conditioning, whether its Ford, whether its Eaton.
I was in Cleveland and Eaton Corp. theyre leaving and so many companies are leaving. And frankly, Im disgusted with it and Im tired of seeing it and theres no reason for it. Its just gross incompetence at the highest level. We should not allow it to happen. Pfizer, great company, pharmaceutical company, theyre going to Ireland.
And theres so many more. You have corporate inversions. You have people who cant get their money back into the country because the politicians cant get along. They cant make a deal.
Everybody agrees  Democrat and Republican  everybody agrees the money should come back...trillion dollars outside of this country. Everybody agrees that the money should be here and the politicians for three years havent been able to make a deal.
And we could make a deal. Theres an example of something that you could do if I sat down with a few of the senators, a few of the congressmen, you could make a deal on that in 10 minutes if you know what youre doing because everybody wants to do it.
And companies are actually leaving our country to get their money, not only because our taxes are too high, which were going to lower by the way. But companies are leaving our country in order to go and get money thats their money because theres no way of bringing it in.
So, weve got a long way to go. But I think at some point its going to get done. This has been very exciting, this whole process.
We started, I was one of 17 people  senators, governors. Ive had such great support. Dr. Ben Carson the other day endorsed us. Great guy. Great guy. Wonderful man. And Chris Christie endorsed us. That was so incredible.
And today Pam Bondi came up and endorsed us. She was great. She is a truly wonderful woman, of the job shes done in Florida is incredible.
You know, so many  weve had such incredible support. Paul Ryan called me the other day  tremendous call. I spoke with Mitch McConnell today. We had a great conversation.
The fact is we have to bring our party together. We have to bring it together.
We have something happening that actually makes the Republican Party probably the biggest political story anywhere in the world. Everybodys writing about it all over Europe, all over the world theyre talking about it.
Millions of people are coming in to vote. This was an example of it today. Many, many more people. Im looking at the polling booths. Im looking at the different polling booths all around the country where its up. And the lines are four, five, six blocks long. And the woman  one woman was there for 40 years. Shes been working the polls. And she said, "Wed have two people here. Wed have three people. Now look at the line." And the line looked like it was, you know, long. It was really long. Five deep and long. And its just a different thing.
We have a great opportunity and the people that are voting are Democrats are coming in, Independents are coming in, and very, very importantly, people that never voted before. Its an incredible thing.


I want to pay my respects by the way to Todd Palin, Sarahs husband. Sarah was here. She was incredible. She was making a speech on my behalf and fantastic and everybody loves her. And what happened is he was in a very bad accident. Hes tough as nails. Hes going to be fine. But I just wanted to pay my respects by the way to Todd.
So, our theme when we started and Melania and I came down. Yeah, sit down everybody. Please. I mean, this is Mar-a-Lago. We give you seats. You dont have to stand. Im looking at all these people.
Cory, good job, Cory. Good job. And Hope and our whole squad. Right?
So when this began, Melania and I and I said, "Got to do it." And she was so supportive and shes been so supportive. Its been amazing. And we have to do it.
We came down the escalator and it was about trade and it was about borders. And what happened is pretty quickly after that and we were  we shot right up. I shot right to the top of the polls and have been leading in the polls almost from the beginning without fail.
We went up in June. Most people said Ill never run. Hes just going to have fun. Hes having a good time. This isnt necessarily  I mean, Im having a good time. You know, Im having a very nice time. But you know what? Im working very hard and there is great anger. Believe me. There is great anger.
One of the broadcasters was saying, "Is there anger?" And I said...I was supposed to say, "No, theres not. We love the way things are working. We love the deal you made with Iran. Its wonderful. You give them $150 billion. We get nothing. We love all the deals. The trade deals are wonderful. You lose $500 billion a year with China. We lose $58 billion a year in terms of imbalance. Its a total imbalance."
We dont make good deals anymore. We dont win anymore. As a country, we dont win anymore.
And they asked, "Is there anger from your people?" ...Theyre not angry people but they want to see the country properly run. They want to see borders. They want to see good health care. They want to see things properly taken care of. They want our military rebuilt. Our military is in a very bad state. They want it rebuilt. Very, very importantly, and they want the Second Amendment by the way protected and protected strongly and thats going to happen.
And you know what they want so badly? They want our veterans taken care of. Our veterans are treated so badly.


So, we started and something happened called Paris. Paris happened and Paris was a disaster. That was  there have been many disasters. But it was Paris.
And then we had a case in Los Angeles where it was in California where the 14 young people were killed. And it just goes on and on and on.
And what happened with me is this whole run took on a whole new meaning, not just borders, not just good trade deals. Were going to make the best trade deals youve ever seen.
Weve got such endorsements from Carl Icahn and the smartest people in business. And these people are going to be negotiating our deals and theyre the best in the world. We have the best business people in the world. Were going to have such great deals. Were going to do so good with trade. Were going to do so good on the border.
But it took on a whole new meaning, and the meaning was very simple. We need protection in our country and thats going to happen and all of a sudden the poll numbers shot up. And Im just very proud to be a part of this.
I think were going to go. Were going to go on a lot of trips over the next month but I think were going to have a great victory.
And I think more importantly than anything else we are going to start winning again. This country is going to start winning again. We dont win anymore.
We dont win with our military. We cant beat ISIS. Were going to knock the hell out of them.
We dont win at trade  China, everybody, Japan, Mexico, Vietnam, India, name the country. Anybody we deal, anybody we do business with beats us. We dont win at trade. Were going to win at trade. Were going to make our country rich again. Were going to make our country great again. And we need the rich in order to make the great, Im sorry to tell you.
So, Im going forward. We had a fantastic evening. I would have never thought this could have happened. I guess were waiting for one result which possibly will be very successful also.
But to win the states that weve won and to win by the margins and especially, look, this is my second home, Florida. To win by that kind of a number is incredible. Its record-setting.


And I have to say that number one, I want to congratulate Marco Rubio on having run a really tough campaign. Hes tough. Hes smart. And hes got a great future. Hes got a great future.
But I have to say and nobody has ever, ever in the history of politics received the kind of negative advertising that I have. Record, record, record. By the way, mostly false. I wouldnt say 100% but about 90%. Mostly false, vicious, horrible.
They said it was $18 million the first week, meaning last week, and $25 million. It added up to over $40 million.
And you explain it to me because I cant  my numbers went up. I dont understand it. Nobody understands it. My numbers went up.
I mean, its been an interesting experience. Last week, Adam Scott won at the Trump National Doral. Won the big tournament, the world championship of golf. And Adam, whos a great guy  I guess a lot of you folks saw that  but Im watching...we have television screens all over. Were down at this gorgeous green at Doral and everything is working beautifully and then a commercial comes on. The worst commercial and Im with these wonderful people from Cadillac and all these top executives, and Im saying, "Look over there! Look! Dont watch it. Dont. You dont want to watch it." Im saying, "Isnt the grass beautiful? Look! Look! Dont watch."
And they came in waves one after another after another and it was brutal.
And then Adam comes in. Hes this handsome kid from Australia, one of the greatest golfers in the world, made an unbelievable shot on the 18th hole to win the tournament. Hes a great champion. And were giving the award.
And just before we break for a commercial, "Well be right back with our great champion from Australia, Adam Scott" and heres the commercial and I said, "No!" And it was two of them  two of them. Oh, what a day that was. What a disaster. What a disaster. Unbelievable.
So again, I just want to congratulate everybody. This is a really interesting process. Its an amazing process. Its very tough. But it is  by the end, if you get to the end, you can handle a lot of things including pressure because theres nothing like it. Lies, deceit, viciousness, disgusting reporters, horrible people. Its true. Some are nice. Some are nice. Some really disgusting people back there.
And I just want to say were going to go forward and were going to win. But more importantly, were going to win for the country. Were going to win, win, win, and were not stopping. Were going to have great victories for our country.
Thank you very much everybody! Thank you!


...So its so important. You getting out to vote. Its just so important because our country has been taken away from us. Its going so fast.
And you know, youre talking about Second Amendment because I was asking with Randy and a lot of people, I was talking to some of the people before, "What would you like me to focus on?" and they said, "Just Second Amendment. Second Amendment."
Now, the Second Amendment means a lot of other things too...The Second Amendment in under siege. You know that. You know that very well.
We lost a great Supreme Court justice and nobody thought this was going to be part of the equation. And all of a sudden if somebody gets in thats the wrong person, theyll take away that Second Amendment so fast your head will spin.
You see Bloomberg is somebody that wants to knock out the Second Amendment. Hillary is a disaster on the Second Amendment. No, they want to take it away.
So, its just not going to happen. Its not going to happen.
...But we lost our wonderful justice who was a great man and a great Second Amendment person.
I just heard coming up, you know, the Senators. Weve been very disappointed. Im a Republican. Many of you are Republicans. But were not being protected whether its a budget. You saw the budget that was approved a month ago. It was approved by the Republicans. They gave it away. They gave Obama everything.
So Obama wants to put in a Supreme Court judge. He said he wants  hes going to be a very negative person to guns because thats the way it is, okay? Believe me, that will be the way it is. And basically they dont have the right to do that.
But I keep saying, "Well, are the Republicans going to fail or are they going to crack? Whats going to happen?" And coming up today, I hear, "Well, there could be a way of Obama pushing it through." Here we go, right? Here we go.
Same thing you heard with Obamacare. Its going to be defeated. Its going to be repealed. Were going to repeal and replace Obamacare. Believe me.
But  I mean, look whats going on with your premiums. 35%, 45%, 55% up. Your deductible is so high. I mean, youve got to see that truck right there? Youve got to get hit by that truck in order to ever use it.
So, I come up and Im hearing that Obama now who said by the way yesterday, "Donald Trump will not be the president. He will not be." No, its a compliment. Look, hes been perhaps the worst president in the history of the United States. So its a compliment.
But he was all over the place yesterday. Said, "Donald Trump will not be  " I think we have maybe a little surprise in store, and we start right here in South Carolina.


You know, New Hampshire was so amazing. We had a big, big victory in New Hampshire. Amazing people.
And then we come down here and I said, "You know, I think we have an ever bigger lead over here."
And the people have been incredible no matter where we go to speak. Even this. I know that four years ago, you had about 200 people here for the same kind of thing for your frontrunner and hes a good frontrunner, a good guy, and he did well but you had 400 people, 200 people. You have thousands of people here and we just appreciate it, and I wont forget it. Believe me, Im not going to forget it. Im not going to forget it.
So I hear that theyre talking about trying to get a liberal judge and a judge that does not like the Second Amendment and a judge that  and this is one of many. This is one of many but a judge that doesnt want to do a number on the guns and that doesnt know how important it is.
Were just not going to let it happen. Okay? Its not going happen. And if we elected, we know that. But we have 9 months, 10 months to go. We have to have the Republicans hold fast because Im just hearing these little cracks, saying "Well, maybe if he appoints somebody, maybe we could get along, maybe." Its not the way its supposed to be.
Now, its possible that theyll have their wish because if they win, theyre going to be having their choice. But if they dont win, were going to start really taking back because we have 3 or 4 or 5 maybe Supreme Court judges. This was not supposed to be one in question. This was a very sad circumstance that happened with  I mean, really to me it was a very sad circumstance. But now were going to see what happens.
I will only tell you this. We are doing well. We have a really good chance to win. If we can win in South Carolina, were going to go  I mean, we could very well run the table.
I dont know if you saw  I guess a lot of you have seen actually next week in Nevada. Its going to be phenomenal. The relationship there to the people...Bush is 1% in Nevada. This guy  why doesnt he just give up, just go home? Go home. Go home to mom. Got to go home to mommy. You know, Bush is only at 1% in Nevada. A couple of them are, you know, at 10%, 11%, or 12%. Im at like 40% something  48%. So I think were going to do well.
Then I think we have the SEC. Were going to have the SEC, which is going to be I think amazing.
But really now were starting. New Hampshire could not have been better. They gave us a tremendous send-off. They really started us on our way.
And we did well in Iowa. I mean, some votes were stolen from Ben Carson, which by the way was a disgrace. What Cruz  what this guy Cruz did with Ben Carson was an absolute disgrace. What he did was  he stole. Its theft. And then they come out with a voter violation form, which is a fraud as far as Im concerned. And what he did with that whole thing was a disgrace. So were not going to let that stuff happen anymore. I mean, were not going to let it. We will not let it happen. Were all watching. Youre all watching. Keep your eyes wide open.
These politicians  heres a guy, he raises the Bible and yet he tells fibs, he tells lies, and then he does this stuff to Carson and he does other things. Very bad.
So politicians are bad people. Boy, they are bad. Would you believe it?
So were not going to let it happen and were going to get in there...So Saturday. Go out and vote. This is going to be the place thats really going to make it.
And honestly, Ive been watching all the pundits. Now, the bad news is theyre always wrong. They all said Im not running and I ran. Well, how is he going to do? Hes just doing this for fun. Im not doing this for fun. Believe me, I love this location but I know I can be someplace else. Okay? I could be someplace else right now. I could be very happy.
But Im doing it because you know the expression and I see all the hats in the audience  Make America great again. We are going to make America so ... ...
We are going to win again. You know, we dont win very much. Youre very smart, tough people. You like to win. Right? This guy over here. You like to win. And we dont win anymore. We used to win. We dont win anymore. Well, were going to start winning again. Were going to start winning again.
So, Second Amendment protected. Common Core. Were going to end Common Core. Were bringing your education locally. Its going to be fabulous. I dont know if you know or if youve heard me say we have the absolute worst  we spend number one in the world on education. Right? Number one per pupil in the world. There is no second place because were so high, so much  you have China, you have Norway, you have Denmark, you have Sweden. You have these countries are the best in terms of education and theyre on the list the best. And the 30th in the top 30  were number 30th. Okay? Were number one in costs.


Thats a little bit like what Im doing. Im the least spent money. You know, Im funding my own campaign. Right? So, I dont have a lot of the people coming to me. You know, the drug companies and all of the  because if you would see the kind of waste, fraud, and corruption in the United States, a lot of it isnt really waste, fraud, and corruption. Its the fact that people that are running against me and people in the Senate, people in Congress, they have tremendous power because they have people giving them unbelievable campaign contributions and theyre special interests and they do what those people want. And thats one of the reasons why our budget is out of whack, the military is out of whack. The military orders equipment they dont even want and the stuff they do want they dont get because the company that makes that equipment is like, you know, its not politically adept, and companies that really are, they make the equipments we dont want. Its going to all change because Im not getting any money from all of these people. I dont give a damn. I mean, were going to do the right thing. Were going to absolutely do the right thing.
Ill tell you a little story. So the drug companies. We are the largest purchasers of drugs in the world, the United States...which makes a lot of sense I guess. But we purchase more drugs that make you better, drugs that make you better, not the kind of drugs that come over the southern border, which were going to end. Okay? Were going to build a wall. Yup. Folks, by the way, were going to build a wall and whos going to pay for the wall?
[Audience: "Mexico"]
You better believe it. We have a trade deficit with Mexico of $58 billion. And these characters come up, these politicians that Im running against, "You dont really think Mexico is going to pay for the wall?" I said, "Absolutely, 100%." They said, "How are you going to get Mexico to pay?" And I dont want to get into it because they wont understand it. I mean, they have no concept of business. They have no  you know, the $150 billion we gave to Iran, these people have no concept.
We have a $58 billion trade deficit with Mexico. Okay? The wall is going to cost $12 billion. Maybe less. If I build it, itll be taller, better, and less. Okay?
So you think of this. So you think of this. So they said, "How are you going to possibly do it?"
They make so much money. Plus we give them subsidy. They make so much money from the United States its going to be one of the easiest things.
And I dont know if youve heard, one of the presidents or ex-presidents of Mexico held a news conference. He said, "We will never ever, ever pay for the wall." And the press called me. They said, "They said they will never pay for the wall." I said, "Who was it?" Calderon. Hes very nice, good guy. I said, "Tell him the following. The wall just got 10 feet higher." I mean it. It got 10 feet higher. Yeah, theyre going to pay for it.
And I get along great with Mexico. The problem is  I mean, they buy apartments. I have hundreds and hundreds and even thousands of workers are Hispanics who Im doing great with. We have such an amazing relationship with Hispanics and theyre great people.
The problem is the leaders of Mexico are too smart for our leaders. Theyre too smart. Theyre too cunning.
You look at whats going on. Its unbelievable. The border is a disaster. Its a sieve. People flow over. Its not going to happen anymore, folks. People can come into our country but theyre going to come in legally. Theyre going to come in through a process. Theyre going to come in, theyre going to come in legally.
So with trade, were going to solve the trade problem. I dont know if you saw Carrier air conditioner announced two days ago theyre moving to Mexico. Nabisco. Theyre moving their big plant from Chicago to Mexico. Ford, theyre moving this massive complex  theyre building a $2.5 billion plant and now theyve just announced theyre building it bigger.
Ive been talking about this for two years. Yesterday, the Wall Street Journal, they announced theyre building it bigger. In another words, theyre doubling down. You know why? Nobody does anything about it. Im going to do something about it.
So I watched  somebody asked, "What would you do about Carrier?" Because that was a sad case. Somebody used their cell phone and they were telling them, "Youre out of work. Youre out of job. Forget it. Its over. Were moving to Mexico." Are crying. Grown men that have been there for a long time. Really incredible people. And theyre crying and theyre devastated and they lost their job and theyve never had another job and now this plant  this whole thing is moving to Mexico.


And they said, "What would you do?" I said Ill tell you what Im going to do because you know they talk about free trade. Im a free trader. But I say oh if I put a tax on these characters  these idiots. I mean, theyre like stupid. They say "Donald Trump is not a true conservative because he taxes." Its got to be fair stuff, folks. Its got to be fair. Im a conservative person.
Hey, Im the most conservative on the border. Im the most conservative with the military. Nobodys tougher than me. Im the most conservative. We are going to make our military so big, so strong, so powerful, nobodys ever going to mess with us, folks. We wont have to use it.
Im the most conservative on taking care of the vets. Our vets are treated horribly. Were going to take care of our  Im the most conservative on Common Core. Were ending Common Core  I told you that  and were moving it locally. And nobody is more conservative and we call toughness but nobody is more conservative on the Second Amendment. So all of these things.
But with Carrier...theyre coming across and theyre going to build a plant and probably get some subsidies from Mexico  probably  weve probably given them subsidies. They probably have the United States giving subsidies to move out of the country. Thats how stupid it is and thats how stupid were running...They said, "What would you do?" I say its very easy. We call them. We say lets have a meeting. Heres the story folks. Youre moving to Mexico. Congratulations. But if you dont stay in the United States youre going to have a problem. But heres what you do it. You want to move to Mexico, build your factory, its going to be wonderful. Hire your people theyre not from the United States. All those people are now looking for jobs. Those are good jobs. You know were hiring a lot of part-timers now...The numbers are totally phony. The 5%  totally phony numbers. So I say heres what were going to do. Very simple. You build your plant in Mexico. Enjoy yourselves. And youre going to have air conditioners and just have them cross the border and sell them to the United States? No, youre going to pay a 35% tax on every air conditioner. Its true. Its the only thing you can do.
And you know what? Its the only thing you can do. Theres nothing else. Because otherwise how are you going to get them to stop?
And then you have the devaluation with China. The all-time. Theyre like grand chess masters or grand  I mean these people are the greatest  the greatest in history. Theyre grandmasters of that  devaluation. They devalue their currency.
Japan is doing very well too. Theyre killing Caterpillar. You know, theyre ordering Komatsu tractors now because theyve devalued  look, you take a look at whats happened to the Yen and its very hard. A friend a mine. Hes a big excavator. You all know excavators. I love excavators. This guys a very big one. He buys Caterpillar tractors all the time and excavators. He just put in a big order for Komatsu. Not that he wanted to. He said, "Donald, they made it impossible for me not to buy. Theyve devalued the yen to such an extent  Japan  that it made it, I mean, I owe it to my family, to my company, to myself. I have no choice." And he was like depressed. He wanted to buy Caterpillar...
Well China is doing that times 100, times 1,000, and what theyre doing is the devaluation of their currency makes it impossible for people to compete. We cant allow that stuff to happen.
Look, when we send stuff over to China, it doesnt get in. If it does get in, you have to pay a big tax. You know, its not supposed to be that way. You know, its supposed to be free trade. Its supposed to be they come we go, back and forth. They devalued their currency and on top of it, they make it impossible.
I have a friend whos a great manufacturer. He said its virtually impossible to get his goods and he makes better stuff than they do. He cant get his goods into China. When he does get them in, theres a tax to pay.
I have a friend who actually bought an airplane and he cant get it into China because the tax is so massive. Hes going to sell it now at a big loss. Okay?


And think about Boeing. Okay? Think about Boeing. Boeing is building a plant over here. Boeing just had a big order from China. But China is making them build a massive airline facility. Right? Massive. Like bigger than anything youve seen.
Okay, you feel good about Boeing right now. Tell me in five years. Unless Im president. Youll be fine. Dont worry about it. But tell me in five years youre going to feel good about Boeing because Ill tell you whats happening. They are going to build that plant  theyre building it, its going to be finished soon  theyre going to build that plant, theyre going to devalue the hell out of their currency, and all of a sudden youll be reading a big front page story all over the place that Boeing is going to leave, right, South Carolina, theyre going to make all their planes in China. Because this is what they do. Thats what they do. And our leaders arent smart enough to stop it, okay?
I have Carl Icahn endorse me. Great businessman, very rich guy, very, very successful. If I told Carl, Carl, watch over China trade, were going to be in great shape.
We have right now people that have no concept of what theyre doing. They have no concept of what theyre doing. Theyre political hacks. Thats what they are. Theyre political hacks and these are the people that are negotiating with these people China. And again, China likewise, I get along great with China. Largest bank in the world my tenant. They buy condos for tens of millions of dollars. I have the Bank of America building in California. I own a big chunk of that. I got that through China through a very complex set of transactions but through China.
I mean, I think China is terrific. Im not angry at China. Im angry at our leaders for not being able to compete with China. Im not angry.
So were going to get things changed around. Were going to use our best people. Were going to be so smart, and were going to start winning again. Were going to have strong borders. Were going to have strong military. Were going to take care of our vets. Were going to have such great trade deals. Were going to win again. Were going to win again. Were going to win so much.
And you know, and by the way, we are going to get rid of ISIS and were going to get rid of them fast.
I was against the war in Iraq from the beginning. I was against the war in Iraq. We shouldnt have done it. We did it. Then Obama got out the wrong way. We shouldnt have done Iraq. We did it. It destabilized the Middle East. Exactly. If you go back, you could see 2003, 2004, I said its going to totally destabilize the Middle East because you had Iran and Iraq and they were the same militarily. Theyd fight, fight, fight. Boom. Then theyd rest. Then theyd fight, fight, fight for years and years and years. We decapitated Iraq and now Iran is taking over. Not only do they get the $150 billion. Maybe the worst transaction Ive ever seen negotiated. No, no, dont buy the famous Obama administration.
The worst, one of the dumbest deals Ive ever seen. I mean, we get nothing. We get nothing.
We should have gotten those hostages before we started even negotiating. Not now. We should have gotten them years ago.
But if you look at whats going on and now on top of that we gave them Iraq because Iran is now taking over Iraq. Its just taking them over.


So heres what we did. We spent $2 trillion, thousands of lives lost, wounded warriors who we all love all over the place. Theyre the best people. Most incredible. Theyre tougher than all of us these people. I mean, what theyve gone through. So the wounded warriors all over the place. You know what we have? We have nothing. We have nothing. We have absolutely nothing. So heres what were going to do. Were going to change things around. Were going to be smart. And we have  well do what we have to do in terms of ISIS and all. But we have to start rebuilding our country.
We have $4 trillion in the various places. $4 trillion. Not going to happen anymore.
Were going to have a strong military. But were going to have to rebuild our roads, our bridges, our tunnels, our schools, our hospitals.
I mean, our country is like a third world country. You go over to Qatar, you go over to some of these places in the Middle East. You go to China. You see the airports. You see the bridges. They have bridges that are so incredible youve never seen anything like it. They have railroad trains that go 350 miles an hour and we have things that go chug, chug, chug, chug like from 100 years ago.
Weve become like a third world nation because were fighting everybody elses battles. And remember this, we are like the policemen of the world but we dont get paid anything. We protect Germany. We protect Japan. Do you know that in Japan if we get attacked, we have a treaty with Japan, if we get attacked they dont have to do anything. If they get attacked, we have World War III, we have to protect them. Okay? I mean, who makes these deals?
We protect as an example South Korea, who have a maniac right next to them. Right? But we protect South Korea. So every time we order televisions, they come from South Korea, they make a fortune. We protect South Korea. Let me tell you something. Why arent they paying? They pay peanuts for what we do.
Every time this guy, you know, raises his head, we see our ships start to sail, our soldiers get ready. We have 28,000 soldiers at the border.
So we take care of the world. We dont get it.
Saudi Arabia, before the oil went down, they were making $1 billion a day. $1 billion a day. And we rent space there so we can help them. We rent military bases. We pay rent. And yet without us they wouldnt last for two weeks. Theyd be gone.
So were going to change all that stuff folks. I mean, I want to be good. We want to be fair. We want to have heart. And were not going to let these Syrian folks in that we dont know who they are. We dont know where they come from. Theyre not coming into this country. Theyre not coming in.
I mean, there are a lot of them. I dont know if you know it. You have a lot of them moving into South Carolina. I dont know. Have you heard this? And you ought to tell your governor dont let them move to South Carolina. You dont want them in South Carolina.
And I know theyll say, "Well, we have nothing to do. Were state government." Let me tell you something. If a governor from a state didnt want to have them, I dont care what it says, you dont have to have them...
We want to help them with safe zones. We want to get the Gulf States to pay. I dont want to pay. We owe $19 trillion. We owe enough. We can lead it but let the Gulf States  they have so much money they dont know what to do with it. Let them build safe zones.
Look at whats happening in Germany. Its a mess. Look at Sweden. Look at Brussels. I mean, Brussels, you go there 20 years ago, 15 years ago it was incredible.
So when I call for moratoriums and I call for this, first I get hit with tremendous heat. Right? Then everybody starts to say, "You know, hes right."
Same thing  on June 16th, I announced weve got to stop illegal immigration. The heat I took was unbelievable. Three, four weeks later theyre all saying, you know, Trump is right. Then Kate killed in San Francisco, beautiful Kate, by an illegal immigrant. You have Jamiel in Los Angeles killed. Incredible guy. Young man. The fathers a friend of mine  a great guy. You had the veteran  65-year-old woman  a veteran raped, sodomized, and killed in Los Angeles by an illegal immigrant. Weve got to stop it folks. Weve got to stop it. Weve got to be smart. Weve got to be a country again. Weve got to be a country again.
So I just want to thank  this endorsement meant so much to me from these two guys and from the whole community. I just want to say get out and vote. Were going to do something youre going to be so happy with. Were going to win so much and were going to make America great again. Thats what we want to do. Make America great again. So Saturday, get out and vote. Thank you! We love you all. Thank you very much! Thank you. Thank you very much folks.


I dont really think  look, what happened is we had 17 candidates originally. I was expected to come in like anywhere maybe 10, 11, 12, 13. I ended up coming in second. Didnt devote tremendous time to it. Didnt devote tremendous money to it.
In fact, I guess in terms of money per vote, Im about at the bottom, meaning the most efficient.
I came in second. I came into strong second. Third, I think, was quite a bit away  I think 2,500 or something  close to 3,000 votes away. Theres a big difference between second and third.
I think we did really well. You know, as far as thats concerned.
I think the press  some of the press said I did fantastically well. Some of the press doesnt want to give it credit.
I think we did very well. I didnt expect to do so well. I guess what did happen is one poll came out and said Im 4 or 5 points ahead and that maybe build up a false expectation for some people.
But it had taken me back to June 16th. I was told "Dont even go to Iowa. Start right here in New Hampshire. Just dont waste your  "
...Im going to Iowa. I went. I bonded with the people, bonded with evangelicals. We did really fantastically and came very close to winning. I mean, we came very close to winning. We came in second place.
So I am very happy with what happened in Iowa. You know, you had 17 people and I was second. Now, I guess you have 11 people and I was second. And I think we did a very good job.


No, I dont think I feel any pressure. I mean, were going to just do what I have to do. And if it works out, thats great. And if it doesnt, thats okay too because you know Im here to do one thing  the theme  make America great again. Im going to do it.
And I think we did very well  I think we did really well in just about everything weve done running for office. I think we have a very good result yesterday. It could have been a little bit better. It could have been one notch better.
But its interesting all of these governors and senators that you have way down the list, theyre at 1%, 2%, you know, in terms of what happened  what just happened  theyre at 1%, theyre at 2%, theyre 3%. Nobody ever talks about them. And Im at 24% or 25%, and they say, "Oh, couldnt you have done better?"
You know, I think the result was quite good especially for the amount of time I spent and for the amount of money I spent.






Well, I think I have  I think it fits me better, probably suits me better. Ive done very well in New Hampshire. Ive been here a lot more. I have very good relationships with the people of New Hampshire.
But Ive had very good relationships with pretty much everybody.






I really dont. I really dont see that happening. I dont know whats going to happen. You dont  nobody does. Well see what  youll have many, many people that arent doing very well. I am doing very well. But you have many, many people that are here, that are well-known politicians  theyre governors and theyre senators  but theyre not doing very well. And they just came back from a, you know, very major defeat yesterday. And mine wasnt.
...You know, its very interesting. If you look at the numbers from yesterday, I got the highest number in history outside the one number  in the history of the primary.






...Also, I guess they had 185,000 people, which is 45,000 or 50,000 people more than they ever had.






No, I mean, I think well get a lot of Sanderss voters. You know, theyre very much into the trade world and Im the best on trade. He mentions it but I dont think hes going to be capable of doing anything about it.
No, I think were going to do really well here. I look forward to it.






We have a lot of events scheduled, yes.






Well, we do. We have one commitment long-term for Arkansas actually where were going to have about 10,000 people. But were going to be back and forth very quickly. Were going to have a lot of events scheduled, yes.






Well, I just think, you know, Im just happy with the way were doing. You know, weve bonded with the people whether its there or here. I mean, theres just a big bonding process going on.
If you look at South Carolina, its the same thing. I mean, were doing really well there. But weve devoted much more time here and South Carolina 






Its not a question of learning. I mean, I just want to continue to do well...Our theme  the theme is so important. Its just make America great again. Thats what were going to do. Thats what were going to do. Not really a question of learning.


Well, if you look at the second place, people didnt talk about my second place. They didnt talk about it as positively as they should have. And yet, with Marco who was more than 2,000 votes behind me  thats a lot of votes by the way  they said, "Oh, hes surging. Hes surging."
So, I dont know why is the third place person doing well and the second place person, who by the way has never run  Scott was mentioning before  "One of the amazing things about you, youve never run for office before. Its incredible how you did."






My brands doing great. Yeah.






No, I think just work. Were going to work very hard and we have a lot of meetings, a lot of talks, a lot of speeches. Were going to be meeting with a lot of people and I think were going to do very well.






Well, well be doing some of that but we also have some very big events planned like tonight, I think they have 4,000 or 5,000 people and other people were here yesterday and they had 200 people. Same venue, same everything. They had 200 people.
So we have  theres a good bonding going on.






Well, I enjoyed it.






I have unlimited, I have unlimited  you know, its funny. When I look at the various people, they said so and so has $20 million. I have unlimited. Thats not the thing.
The only  you know, Im a businessperson. I want to spend wisely. And Im probably $40 million under budget because of the fact that frankly I havent had to spend very much although I guess we just did a recent filing and I would be probably having spent now maybe $14 million, $15 million.
But Im self-funding. And I must tell you, I dont know that enough people appreciate it. Im self-funding anyway whether they appreciate it or not. So I wont be influenced by the lobbies and you know et cetera, et cetera.
But I dont know  I was talking to Scott about this before  I dont know its really appreciated by the voters. Im the only one on both sides thats self funding. Im putting up my own money. And I dont know that the voters appreciate it. When they go into vote, I dont think they say "Im going to vote for Trump because hes self-funding and hes not going to be influenced by lobbies and special interests et cetera."






Im going to tell them and I tell them. But sometimes they like it but I dont think its something they vote for, which is a shame because its actually a very big thing. You understand that. Its a very big thing. Its a very big element if you could have somebody that can actually self-fund and not be influenced by bad decisions...or looking for themselves or looking for the company or country they represent. Thats a real positive...
I just dont know whether or not the voters appreciate it.






Ive learned that theyre great people. I really, I thought the people in Iowa were fantastic...You know, obviously I was second. I had the largest vote getting in the history of a Republican primary except for one and I brought many of those extra people in. And they also had as you know the largest turnout in the history of Republican primaries in terms of Iowa by far  not even close. I think it was like 50,000 or 60,000 more than theyve ever had before. So I just  I learned that they are terrific people in Iowa.


Yeah, I look forward to it.






...No, I dont think so. I have a very good relationship with Marco. I like him... I dont see that necessarily.






Youre talking about Iowa? Well, that could have been with the debate. I think it could have been the debate. I think some people were disappointed that I didnt go in the debate.
If I had to do it again, I would have done the exact same thing. And the reason is  you know why? Because I raised $6 million for the vets in one hour.
So if I took a second place instead of a first place and could give the vets $6 million, Ill do that all day long.






Well, were going to be spending money. Were going to be spending money  were going to be spending a lot of money. Well be spending money on ads and well be spending money on the ground game.






I cant help it, honey, whether Im celebrity. I mean, this is me.






Look, I think most people say I did a great job in Iowa. I came in second. I spent far less than anybody else. And had I known that I was going to be liked as much as I am in Iowa and people did like me  you will understand that  I would have maybe spent a little bit more and I would have been there a little bit more and maybe I would have won it. But, you know, Im very happy with it. I have 7 delegates right at the top.
You look at other people in all fairness  senators, governors  theyre, you know, theyre way down.
When I have 25% or 26% and they have 1% but you people dont mention that.






But the one thing is you people dont mention that. You dont mention all the other names.
Now, you mention the person, Marco, good guy. But he came in third. And they make it sound like he had a victory and I didnt. But I came in second.
...I started off on 17th. I was 17th. When I first started, I had nothing. And then I inched my way up  went pretty rapidly actually. And now Im leading everything and I did okay in Iowa. Pretty good in Iowa.


Well, I think were going to have great success here. I think its a much different kind of a process. This isnt a caucusing process. This is a much different  this is a normal voting process. The Iowa is a much different kind of a thing.






Well, he [referring to Ted Cruz] insulted me. I mean, he started with the insults, as you know. And he insulted Ben Carson by doing what he did to Ben Carson. That was a disgrace. And he insulted the people of Iowa by doing a voter violation form that nobodys ever seen before which was disgraceful. No, no, hes a man of insult.






No, Im going. I have thousands of people going. No, but we dont have that invite. I like Mike Huckabee but no, I dont think hes even going to be there.






I did. I did. No, I like him. Well, hes left the race so I feel pretty good about that. Hes a good man.






Well, were adding some and were adding them pretty rapidly.






...People in your world are saying they possibly could. So I dont really see one or two. I see there could be a number.






Id love to finish first. You know, again it would still not be horrible because youre competing against a lot of very talented people that have been politicians all their lives. I have been a politician for 6 months.
No, but Id love to finish first.






Wouldnt horrible but you know it wouldnt be the worst thing in the world. I could think of worse things. But Id like to finish first. I think we will finish first. Id like to finish first.






...Just so you understand. I am totally self-funding my campaign other than small donations because people send in small donations for $10, $15, $20...






No, no, thats merchandise sales. Thats a lot of merchandise sales.






Its a small amount of money compared to what I put in.






Its very hard when somebody sends you a check for $17.50 and $9 and $200, very hard to send that back.






I am. And I always make the reference. I always make a reference to that and I do it every time.






Well, hes [referring to Scott Brown] somebody that I respect, always liked. And hes very, very respected throughout the country but hes very respected here. And everybody wanted his endorsement and Im very honored that hes giving it to me and hes going to give it to me on the stage.






That happens with endorsements. No, that happens with endorsement. Its pretty common with endorsements.






...A poll came out a few days before that said I was about 5 points so maybe there was a tinge.
And again, it may have been the debate, which would have set records if I did it. So I would have liked that. But the fact is it could have been the debate. Maybe it is. Maybe it isnt. But I would have done it exactly the same way because I raised, Scott, we raised in one hour, I raised $6 million for the vets. And I would never, ever give that up to go between first and second in Iowa. Wouldnt be worth it.






I think her email situation is very serious. I have a feeling shes being protected by the Democrats because it just looks to me to be more serious than anybody that Ive seen including Gen. Petraeus.
If you watch and study and read about various lawyers  you know, thats what they do  they really feel shes in grave danger and what shes done is against the law not just against rules. Its against the law. I just dont know whats going to happen because I dont know whether or not the Democrats are going to protect her.






I never saw a race where theyre flipping coins. I mean, theyre flipping coins. What kind of a race is that? Its ridiculous. I thought it was terrible. I mean, you call it a tie. But to flip coins, they say "Okay, youre going to get this district. Were going to flip a coin."






I dont know. I cant tell you yet. I think hes [referring to Ted Cruz] certainly was dirty what he did to Ben Carson was terrible. He did the voter violation form. I thought that was terrible. Actually, I thought it was terrible. And when they said that Ben Carson was out of the race and come vote for him, I thought that was terrible.
Okay?
Thank you everybody. Thank you. Thank you.


Wow, what a crowd. Thank you very much everybody. Such an honor. With the snow coming down and its a little cold outside and you have hundreds of people still outside trying to get in. But you know, we wont wait. Well go ahead. Right?
Well go ahead.
First of all, congratulations to the Iowa State basketball team. You had a  what was that all about? I turned on the game. I said, "Wow, this shouldnt be that good of a game." And at the end of the game, I said, "Who won?" Yes? That was great and its a great achievement.
I also want to pay my respects to Ben Carson. They had a really bad accident. Some of his staffers were hurt really bad. So I just want to pay my respects to Ben. Hes a good guy  a really good guy  and his staffers and hopefully they get better. Say a prayer for them. Okay?
Weve had an amazing time today. Weve been all over Iowa and were going to be here tomorrow. Were going to be here so much youre going to get so sick of me. Youre going to say, "Please, tell him to get out of here. Tell him to leave. Tell him to go."
But weve had an incredible time.
And you know it started really  weve had really a pretty good week. The debate last week  everybody watched the debate. And who knew about these debates? I didnt know anything about the debates. And its been fun and its been interesting. And Ive been treated semi-fairly by the moderators. Not 100%. Some have been very fair actually, and some have been not so fair.
And you know, a lot of the press hasnt been very fair.
Boy, look at the press back there. They must think theres a big event going happen today. Wow, thats a lot of them  its like the Academy Awards.
But weve had an amazing  its been an amazing experience and it started really on June 16th when we came down the escalator. We came down that escalator and it was  I said, "Lets go" to my wife, whos been so supportive and so wonderful. I said, "Lets go. Were going to make America great again. Thats what were going to do."
And you know, its hard to do this because when you think of it Ive never done it before. Ive never been a politician. Thank goodness but Ive never been a politician. Ive always done jobs and put a lot of people to work. Tens of thousands of people over the years.
And you know, I have thousands of Hispanics that love me. The Nevada poll just came out where Im leading with Hispanics, which I knew, I knew.
And we came out at that particular opening when I opened and said Im going to run for president I gave up a lot. You know, gave up a lot of different things including telling our friends at NBC no more Apprentice. Thats hard to do. You have a top show and you say, "Im not doing it anymore. Im sorry." They wanted to do it so badly.
And Steve Burke, whos a fantastic executive, came up to my office and said "Come on, Donald. Come on. Do it. Youre not going to run. Do it. Do it." I said, "Steve, Im going to run." I was pretty sure. You know, that was about two months before. I was pretty sure. It really is a tough thing to do.
You know, all my life Ive heard "If youre a very successful person, youll never run for president. Youll never really run for politics. But youll never ever run for president."
And I built a great company and its a tremendous number. You saw the filings. The press was going to look so closely. It was like D-Day when we put those papers in.
You know, first thing I did I announced. They said, "Oh, hes actually going to do it" because most of them said "Hell never do it."
Then when I signed...thats when you sign your life away. And I signed that. They said, "Whoa! He signed that. Well, hell never file his financials because maybe hes not as rich as everybody thinks."


And I filed the financials and they saw an unbelievable  you didnt hear a thing about it. Oh boy, were they looking. I mean, were they looking. And almost 100 pages. The biggest report ever filed with the FEC in terms of that. And it showed a company thats a phenomenal company with some of the great assets, very little debt, tremendous cash flow. You know, the way its supposed to be. And its great.
And the reason I tell you that is because that is the kind of thinking we need now in the United States. We need that kind of thinking. We need that  whatever it is. We need a mentality thats going to  you know, were at $19 trillion in debt. Its going to be up to $21 trillion. You saw that horrible budget. Horrible, horrible budget that was approved two weeks ago and thats going to lift it.
And so we went along and a lot of things have happened and then the polls came out which I love and new ones came out today and Ill tell you right now. You know, now that were at it. And they came out some brand new ones  some beauties. And ones coming out  I guess a big ones coming out. I dont know exactly what it is but its got to be pretty good because I see the response.
I mean, even this with all the people still trying to come into this building. Somebody said its a barn. This is a very nice barn actually. But with all of the people still trying to come in, you see what it is.
And we do have something special in a couple of minutes. To me, its really special because its a person that I think is a spectacular person. So its very special to me.
But then the polls came out and some of them  as an example  national polls 38% for Trump, 20% for second. I wouldnt even names. Right? I wont even mention names. Im going to be non-confrontational today for a change.
21% for the second. 11%. And then theyre all down. Some of them are actually at 0% and 1%. I dont know.
Jeb  well, you know, Jebs got one problem. He loves Common Core, meaning he wants your kids educated from Washington, which is immediately no good.
And his second problem is hes very weak on illegal immigration. Remember, he said they come as an act of love. I said, "What? They come as an act of love?"
So I think those are two very bad points frankly.


...So South Carolina just came out and thats 32% for Trump, 18% for second, 11% for third. Great.
Florida leading by a lot  31%, 19%, 13%, and then all down in the dumps.
Georgia just came out. I have 33%.
Yeah, dont forget thats 33%. Hard to believe. Thats with 14 people, 15 people. I dont know when they took it but it was recent. 33%.
Connecticut  now, Tom Brady loves me and thats sort of like, you know, and I love Tom Brady by the way. 35% to 18% to 9% to 2%. You know, to nothing.
Maryland just came out. Maryland  great place  32% to 15% to 11% to 9% and then you know they sort of phase out.
You ever hear of a place called Iowa? Oh, I love this. Were doing actually great. First of all, I have to tell you. You know, they never report it. Even CNN doesnt report it. CNN does a poll, probably spent millions, they never report their poll.
The CNN poll was 33% for Trump, 20% for Chris. Nobody talks about it. Nobody talks about it. They dont talk about it. They talk about  CNN is reporting other peoples polls. So, I call up. I say, "Wait a minute. Youre CNN. You spent a fortune on polls and you dont report your own polls because Im winning by a lot." And they have no excuse but they keep reporting other polls. But were doing well. I think were doing a lot better than anyone knows.
Gravis just came out  34% for Trump, 28% for Cruz. PPP 28% for Trump, 26% for Cruz. In other words, its a little close here. Quinnipiac poll  very respected 31% for Trump, 29% for Cruz. And then again CNN 33% to 20%.
So were  I think were doing good. I think were actually doing better than the polls.
Now, I could do this. I could say, "Well, I just want to do well in Iowa." I want to win Iowa, folks. Because look, I love the people. The evangelicals have been phenomenal. Im doing great with the evangelicals but nationwide Im winning with evangelical  I dont know if you know that  by a lot nationwide.
With Iowa, Im doing really well with the evangelicals. Were doing really well with the Tea Party. Were doing well  I mean, you hear the numbers. I mean, these are the numbers.
But I actually think were doing even better than the polls. And you know, theres the thing that a lot of people said, you know, they call up, "Are you going to vote for Trump? Hes got very, very tough immigration policies. He wants to destroy Obamacare and replace it with something a lot better." Im going to do that. Okay?
But you know, a lot of people, theyll pick up the phone and theyll hear different things and theyll say, "Uh, no Ill vote for  " and then theyd get in the booth and they say, "Trump is my man." There are a lot of people saying that were going to do a lot better. But well see because Feb. 1st you have to get to caucus, you have to go out. Youve got to do it. Otherwise, weve all wasted our time.
You know, one of the groups in Maine and it was like incredible. We were in different places up in New England recently and New Hampshire was amazing. And the people are standing there. It was so cold. There was one little group of  despite global warming  you know, you hear about "It was so cold." It was windchill below zero. And people were standing outside for hours trying to get in.
And then you hear the announcers. "Well, will they show up to vote?" And I dont know much but I say like if people are going to stand out for four hours in the cold or the heat because believe me they stood out in the heat during the summer and during the fall like you wouldnt believe in Tennessee, in Texas where we had 21,000 people, no matter where we go we have these big crowds but theyll stand for hours and hours to get in. Why arent they going to go and vote? Or in your case caucus? Why arent they going to go and vote? Its sort of an amazing thing. So we think theyre going to really be  why would somebody wait for hours for four hours and not going to take two minutes to vote?


Now, yours is a little more complicated because the caucus system is a little bit different. Its a very interesting system. But it is different.
Heres what I have to say about Iowa. Its very important.
So you know theres a movement to move Iowa to the back of the pack. Okay? You know that. Youll still see me but you wont see other people. Believe me. Im loyal. To a fault Im loyal.
But youre going to see. I give you my word. I win; theyre not touching Iowa. This is an amazing tradition. No, seriously. This is an amazing tradition. Theyre not moving Iowa back.
And theyre not moving New Hampshire either because theyre talking about Iowa, New Hampshire. Theyre not touching New Hampshire.
So, were going to just keep it the way it is. It really is. Its an amazing. First of all, youre amazing people. But all over the country its a movement all over the country. The people are incredible. They want to make America great again. Theyre going to do something thats special.
And you know we used to talk silent majority? I say its the noisy majority because its actually a noisy majority. Its not a silent majority.
But people are fed up.
So I started on June 16th and we did well. Practically from the beginning we went up. And if you remember, we started at nothing. You know, we started at nothing because nobody believed I was going to [run]. Even when they  my wife said, "You know if you run, youre going to win." I said, "What do you mean?" She said, "People dont believe youre going to run." At the polls. I was getting these little polls. I felt like some of these guys now that are senators and governors; they get these little polls.
...Jeb again, right? Boy, hes taking a lot of abuse. You know? I told him "You know what? You should use the name Bush. Whats wrong? Use the name Bush. I mean, maybe its not working but its better than Jeb right?" You know, I really do. Get rid of the exclamation point and just put Jeb Bush. Its your name. Dont be ashamed of your name.
So anyways, I wish him the best.
But, you know, I started and I started at like 2% or 3% and then it went to 6% and then it went to 9%. And each time the pundits  these real geniuses back here  some of them are sitting back here  these real geniuses like George Will with the little glasses  take away the glasses. He looks like a dumb guy, Im telling you.
But each time these geniuses would say, "Well, hes reached his plateau. Hes plateaued" at 6%, right? Then it goes to 11%. "Well, you know, this is surprising but hes reached his plateau." And then it goes to 18%. And then it went to 22%, 24%, 28%, then it went to 32%. Then it went actually 42% in the Gravis poll and in Reuters we got to 42% and even a little above that. And then all of a sudden you didnt hear so much about the plateau.
I want to plateau at 42%. You know, 42% with like 14 people thats pretty good.
But they kept saying, "Hes plateaued. Thats all hell get. Hes got these followers."
We have the smartest followers there are. Number one, we have the smartest. And the hardest working followers. We have people that love the country more than anybody and they want to take back whats happened because our country is going to hell.
We can be nice about it. We can say it nice and soft. Our country is going to hell.
When you look at this crazy Iran deal where were paying $150 billion and they give us the five back but they dont know where the fifth is and you understand what that means. Thats not a good sign. But they give us five people but they get seven and they get 14 off the Interpol. These are bad dudes. They get 14 plus seven so theyre getting 21 people. And they have the right to do whatever they want from an enterprise standpoint. Right to do oil. Right to do whatever they want.


But what do they also get out of that deal? First of all, theyre going to get nuclear. They dont have to develop nuclear missiles. They can buy them. For the kind of money we gave them, theyre going to buy them. Why are they going to develop?
Remember the deal? 24 days. They have 24 days for inspection period. They also have self-inspection. Right? But we paid $150 billion. And I always say, "Wow. What a great  the Persians are great negotiators." I say what a great deal that is.
...Two weeks ago I started. I said, "Wait a minute. Thats not a good deal compared to the other deal." They took over Iraq. We gave them Iraq. We knocked the hell out of Iraq. We decimated their armed forces. And you know, for years, they would fight. For many, many years, for decades theyd fight, fight, fight. Nobody would win. Fight. Theyd rest. Then theyd go back to fight.
And now, we gave them the second largest oil reserves in the world, which is Iraq. We gave it to them. Now, theyre going into Yemen. And if you look at Yemen, take a look. Theyre going to get Syria. Theyre going to get Yemen.
Unless, you know, trust me a lot of good things are going to happen if I get in. But lets just sort of leave it the way it is.
They get Syria. They get Yemen. Now, they didnt want Yemen. But did you ever see the border between Yemen and Saudi Arabia? They want Saudi Arabia.
So, what are they going to have? Theyre going to have Iraq. Theyre going to have Iran. Theyre going to have Iraq. Theyre going to have Yemen. Theyre going to have Syria. Theyre going to have everything. Theyre going to be a monster. Weve created this. We have stupid leadership. Really stupid leadership.
So when I started, I said we have to do something about it. Its not something I wanted to do. Its something we have to do.
Because Im representing you. Im not taking any money. Im not, you know, like some of these guys where theyre getting millions and millions of dollars from people I know and theyre nice people and some are very bad people but they have no interest in the country. They have interests in their company or they have interests in countries theyre representing.
And these people and these politicians are going to do exactly as theyre told by their lobbyists, their special interests, and their donors.
Me, Im going to do the right thing.
And I always tell the story. When Ford moves to Mexico, Im going to talk them out of it. When Nabisco moves its plant from Chicago to Mexico, Im going to talk them out of it. Believe me. Its going to be easy. Its going to be easy.
So, I started and I talked about the border. Very strong on immigration and illegal immigration. Took a lot of heat. But you wouldnt even be talking about that subject if I didnt bring it up.
And I talked about again I talked about ISIS and I talked about. But what really happened is after Paris we had 130 people killed.
And by the way, I told you Common Core is dead and Second Amendment is right this way. Were going to protect the Second Amendment. Were going to protect the guns. Were going to protect your guns.
You know, if in Paris and if in Los Angeles, we had the two maniacs that were married. She came on a fiancee permit...You know, wonderful fiancee. She was totally radicalized. Maybe radicalized him. Maybe he was already that way. But weve got to start thinking. We have to start using our head. Bad stuff is happening. We have to find out whats going on.
We have a president who wont even talk about the term. If you think, he wont even mention anything to do with what we all know is going on. And you cant solve the problem if you dont talk about it. You have to talk about it.
So, very, very strongly we started talking about that. And then after Paris  and by the way, if we had a couple of you and you and you and you, if we had three or four people in that room in Paris as an example where they have the toughest gun laws like in the world. You cant have a gun unless youre bad guy, you bought a gun. And they walked in just said "Boom! Boom! Boom! You, move over. Boom!" Killed 130, more to follow because there are people that are so badly wounded.
But if we had a couple of  few of the people that I pointed out  I could plenty in this audience, believe me. But if they had guns on their waist, if they had guns around their ankle where the bullets went the opposite direction, it would have been a whole different story, folks. Itd be a whole different story.


So very, very big on the Second Amendment. But what happened is all of a sudden after Paris and to an extent, to a pretty big extent in California, what happened is these polls started coming in where everybody liked Trump even more. I went up 11 points. I dont want to do it for that reason.
But it went up because people want strength just like having the family of John Wayne, who was great. I love John Wayne. From Iowa. But out of nowhere I got the most beautiful letter from his daughter, who you just met, whos an incredible woman, and she said, "Wed like to endorse you."
John Wayne was a strong guy. We need strength. We need strength in this country because were withering away with political correctness nonsense. Okay? Nonsense.
I mean, if you think of it, you cant say "Merry Christmas" anymore. Were going to say "Merry Christmas" again. You go into these department stores. They dont have any Christmas displays. They dont have the sign "Merry Christmas". Even people that arent Christian are saying "Merry Christmas. We love Christmas. Let us say Merry Christmas, Happy Holidays." But people like to see it. And stores dont put it up anymore. Were withering away. Were going in the wrong direction.
So I said were going to do this and I had no idea it was going to work this way. I figured Id be in the pack and maybe like a race horse. You know, just at the end you can sort of inch it out. I had no idea to have 21 point leads nationally. Were up by so much. And you know, I want to keep it that way. I want to keep it that way.
When you think  and just one thing before I introduce our incredible person, our incredible guest. But one thing  Ive spent to this point almost nothing and Im in first place by a lot. I tell this story. Im not bragging about spending. Im just saying Im telling the story. I have spent  theyll tell you  almost nothing and Im in first place by some polls have me 21 points. Thats a lot. Okay? You know some people have 2%. I have a lead of 20%. But Im in first place by a lot.
Jeb has spent now $77 million. Think of it.
And you know the reason I bring him up  I wouldnt even bring him up  but he spends a fortune on ads against me. You people have all seen it before
I got along with everybody. I contributed to everybody. I was a world class businessman. Now Im a politician, which Id hate to tell you. But you go with everybody. You want to love everybody. You want them all to love you unless youre stupid. But you want everybody to love you.
Everybody knows this story. But so much money has been spent on me. But he spent $79 million. I spend nothing. Im in first by a lot. Hes down towards the bottom of the pack.
And I said to myself, "Its amazing. Wouldnt that be great if this were the country doing this?"
As an example, education. Were number 28 in the world. We have third world countries that are ahead of us. Education is very important to me.
World, I mean, countries that you wouldnt believe are ahead of us. You wouldnt believe if you heard the names of some of these countries. So were 28. But were number one in spending per pupil by far.
Wouldnt it be nice if you had like this election process where we spent the least but we had the best education? You know?
So Sweden and Norway and China and others are the best. Were nowhere near them and yet we spend far more per pupil. So were going to change that and I told you were going to get it localized but were going to change that. Watch, you just watch...
I will tell you this: You cant educate your children through bureaucrats in Washington. And thats what happens with Common Core.
When the parents take over and I really mean this because Ive seen it. When the parents surround those schools and they love those kids and they love those pupils and even when their kids graduate, they are committed to those schools, theyre committed to education. You can do so much better in Iowa than they can possibly do telling you what to do in Washington.
And not all of them but most of them are just interested in "Wheres my check? How much do I get? Lets make the process complicated."
And some of the things that your kids are made to study are an outrage. Okay? So were going to bring that back locally and its going to be great.
So what happened essentially is I started looking and all of a sudden things changed. And people are now looking. They know Ill do great with China. Im going to do great with Japan. Im going to do great with Mexico, whos killing us in trade and killing us also at the border.
We will build a wall and you know whos going to pay for the wall  Mexico. Theyre going to pay for it because they make a fortune and all of those things.
But now, were really focused on security and Im honored because I will tell you that all of polls and the CNN polls where said in particular that Trump is just not by a little bit but by many, many percentage points winning on ISIS, winning on the military, winning with the vets. Were going to take care of our vets big league, by the way. Big league. Big league. And were going to really take care of our military. Its going to be big and strong and powerful and nobodys going to mess with us and its the cheapest thing we can do, Ill tell you that right now.
So its been a real focus.
I just want to now say just a couple of words about a very special person. This is a person who Ive known for a long time, who Ive respected for so long. An incredible husband. An incredible family. And somebody that when I heard that she was going to endorse me, I was so honored. You have no idea how honored.
And I would like to bring up if I might Gov. Sarah Palin. Special, special person. Thank you.


SPEECH 9
 
(AUDIENCE MEMBERS SHOUTING)


  let me just tell you  let me just tell you a little secret. Its the cheapest thing we can do. Were never going to have to use it. I dont think were going to have to use it. Dont forget they talk about my tone. I remember when Jeb and Hillary the same day  Mr. Trumps tone is not nice. Theyre chopping off Christians heads in Syria and other places and they want me to have a nice tone. Im supposed to be, oh, isnt life wonderful, OK?


 Look, weve got to be tough, weve got to be smart, weve got to have heart too. Weve got to have heart, weve got to take care of people. Weve got to fix our health care program. This Obamacare is a disaster. You people know.






You people know. Obamacare is a total catastrophe. Its going to be repealed and replaced. It will die in 17 anyway. I dont know if you heard whats happening. But its so bad, all the people that they didnt think were signing up are signing up.


And the other people that are really paying for it are not signing up. And your rates are going up 25 percent, 35 percent, 45 percent. Your deductibles are so high that unless you get hit by a tractor, youre never going to be able to use your deductible. Youre never going to be able to use it. So Obamacare is a disaster. We are going to repeal it, we are going to replace it.


There are so many great things we can do on health care. So many good things.


SPEECH 10


Wow. Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you.
We start by paying our great respects to Pearl Harbor.
We dont want that stuff. We dont want World Trade Centers. We dont want that ever happen to us again. Its not going to happen to us again.
So I want to thank everybody for being here. Its a great honor.
They have thousands of people outside and sometimes theyll say "Would you like to wait about an hour until they all come in?" But we cant get them in anyways so what difference there. We all got lucky. Were together tonight. Thank you.
So we have a lot of big news today. To me, very big was CNN just came out with a new poll about an hour ago and Iowa  great, great state  and in Iowa, Trump 33%. Beating everybody by a lot. You have Cruz at 20% and Carson at 16% and going down and Rubio at 11% and Bush at 4%. But its Trump at 33%. It just came out. Its Iowa  we love Iowa.
By the way, great ship named after Iowa too. Ive been on that one too. A really great one.
The other big poll that came out just two days ago was the national poll. Trump 36% and then I wont even mention the other numbers because theyre so low.
You know, when you have so many people running  we had 17 and then they started to drop. Ding. Bing. I love it. I love it. And youll be losing a lot over the next little while. I would imagine. I dont know. When somebodys down at zero I would think that eventually theyll drop out. The only difference is theres nothing to pick up if there is zero. What do you pick up? So anyways youll be seeing that.
One of the things I think thats so important because to me very important in the same poll, which is the big national CNN poll, on the economy  so important  Trump 55%. Everyone else nothing.
On the budget  Im really good at these things  economy, budgets. I sort of expected this. On the budget, Trump  this is with 15 people remaining  Trump 51%. Everyone else bing.
Oh, heres one that I started and I took a lot of heat. I took a lot of heat. Sort of like the one were talking about today. I guess youve heard a little bit about it. But Ive taken a lot of heat on this one. Illegal immigration. Now, had I not brought that up in Trump Tower in June when I announced that I was going to run for president, which takes courage to run for president, believe me.
You know, all of my life, Ive heard that if youre a successful person, especially if you have very success  youve done a lot of things, a lot of deals, a lot of everything, you cant run for president.
And yet, thats the kind of mindset and thinking this country needs.
Were being run by people that dont know what theyre doing. Very sad.
On illegal immigration, Trump 48%. Thats with 15 people. Everyone else, no good.
On a thing called ISISoh, dont worry. Well have plenty  well talk a lot about ISIS. Can you believe it?
Here we have generals. They go on television and talk. They do all talk. You people  a lot of military people here. Whos military here? All right, I love you.
By the way, speaking of it, were going to make our military so strong, so powerful, so great, nobodys ever going to mess with us again. Nobody. Theyre never going to mess with us.




You know in many ways, its the cheapest thing we can do. The cheapest thing. Instead of fighting these wars that we dont know what were doing and we have leaders that are afraid to do anything, were going to make it so great, so strong that people  gosh, theyre not messing. Theyre not messing.
And were going to take care of our great vets, our wounded warriors. Were going to take care of them. Because they  thank you, they are not being taken care of.
We have illegal immigrants that are taken care of better than our incredible veterans and its not going to happen any longer. Not going to happen. Not going to happen.
So with ISIS  Trump 46%. Can you imagine that? With all of these characters running.
On foreign policy, Trump way up. And you know, in theory you could say "Well, maybe its not my thing." But people want to see strong, they want to see strength, they want to see protection, they want to be protected. And thats it.
I watched last night and I watched the president truly that didnt know what he was doing. He didnt know why he was there. He refuses to use the term "radical Islamic terrorism". He refuses to use the term.
I dont even know if he knows what the hell is going on. I really dont.
And then were looking at Hillary Clinton. Honestly, I know Hillary. Its just going to be an extension of Obama. I think maybe worse.
Shes got no strength. Shes got no stamina. Remember that.
You dont need a president with no strength or stamina when were being ripped off on trade, were being ripped off on Obamacare, which is going to be repealed and replaced by something really good.
When our soldiers arent being taken care of, when our military is never been like it is today.
One of the generals was on television, as usual, saying that were the least prepared now than anytime that hes ever seen it and hes been there a long time retiring. Thats how we are.
In the most dangerous world weve ever had because of the power of weapons, we have people that dont know  they dont  Im telling you. I watch them. I watch these generals being interviewed.
Do you think Gen. George Patton would be interviewed?
Theyd be interviewed after total and complete victory.
Gen. Douglas MacArthur. Theyre not big for interviews. You know, they shoot first, they talk later.
These guys  and I dont think well have to.
You know, just so you understand, Bush  Bush, he said yesterday he was being interviewed, he said that he was talking about me. He was saying the nicest things about me. Of course, he says hell be elected. Hes at what 3%? Right?
No, but he said some things and I was like  I said "Who says that about an opponent? You dont say those things." Youll find out what he said. But he said very nice things.
But, if you look at what happens where he is upset with me because he says the tone  the tone  of Donald Trump is not nice.
And I say it all the time. We have people whose heads are being chopped off in the Middle East because theyre Christian and for other reasons. Theyre being dumped and drowned in steel cages. And we talk about my tone.
Hillary said the same thing. "Mr. Trumps tone is not nice."
These people are living in a different planet. Different planet.
And remember what I said about Hillary. We need somebody whos strong. We need somebody with incredible energy but incredible intelligence and all of those things.
You know, I know a lot of tough people but theyre not smart. Thats no good. Theyre easy.
We need tough. We need smart. We need like every character. We are so far behind the eight ball in this country.
We owe $19 trillion. The budget they signed two weeks ago is going to make it $21 trillion. Its a  think of it. Trillion. Trillion. Trillion dollars. Who the hell ever heard of the word 10 years ago? There was no such word.


We owe $21 trillion in the very near future. Were really in trouble. We have to rebuild our country. We have to rebuild our infrastructure. We have to rebuild our military.
And yet, we do deals with China where theres a trade imbalance of over $400 billion a year in their favor, by the way, in case you had any question.
Japan  they send their cars by the millions. $70 billion a year imbalance. Thats like a loss.
You look at Mexico. Were going to build a wall. It will be a real wall. It will be a real wall. Gonna happen. Its gonna happen.
The people Im dealing with  and you know, I really focus on Hillary later because I have to get through these 15 people. You know, theres 15 of us.
I had Perry came at me strong; he went down. I had Gov. Walker, nice guy, he went down. Every guy that attacks me so far theyve all gone down. Weve got to keep it that way, right?
I mean, Lindsey Graham. Hes at zero. Hes at zero. Zero.
Let me ask you a question. I dont get Lindsey Graham. I dont get himHes literally at zero. You see him. And he keeps talking. He gets so much television. I mean, hes on television all the time and he doesnt go up. Hes at zero, folks.
His ideas are so bad. Im more militaristic than him. But I know how to win; he doesnt. He just wants to attack everything. He doesnt know where the hell  ra ha.
And he always sits with John McCain. Its like theyre the Bobbsey twins. Theyre always sitting together. No, its true. Do you ever notice? Sometimes I want to see him by himself. Hes always sitting with John McCain, whos fine. Im not knocking it. But you got to know what to do.
Now me, I was against the war in Iraq. So everyone says, you have the right temperament  I have a great temperament. But youve got to attack. If youve got to do something, youve got to know what youre doing.
I said if you attack Iraq and you wipe it out, Iran is going to take over the entire Middle East because youre going to ruin the balance. It was so simple to me.
And actually they sent a group from the White House to see me because I got so much publicity, so much publicity that they sent a group from the White House to see Mr. Trump. I said, "Fellas, youre going to have Iran take over the Middle East and thats whats happening."
And Irans going to take over Iraq as sure as youre sitting there.
And by the way, Iraq, with the second largest oil reserves anywhere in the world. We lost of thousands of lives. We have wounded warriors all over the place. $2 trillion. We have nothing. We got nothing. We have absolutely nothing. And we left.
And we have a president  we shouldnt have been there but then we shouldnt have left the way we left.


You know, the funny thing is I look at Democrats and liberals and conservatives and Republicans  wouldnt it be good all of us if we can get together and really make our country great again? Is that what we want to do?
Ill bet you that if I spoke to that young woman, that quickly I really think I can convince her that were all in this together, folks. We want to have a strong country. Right?
But you know, if you think about it and youll have some that can never be satisfied no matter what. Theyre just troublemakers, et cetera, et cetera. But most people arent and they believe something. And I have some very smart friends dont agree with me; they agree with the other side.
But I really believe that if you took it about making America great, we have to be strong, we have to be vigilant, and if were not vigilant  [interrupted by protester]  that was the same person. Ive got to tell you, so far, the security is not doing a great job in here, Ill tell you that. That was the same person. You can do very nice but why dont you get her out because honestly its inappropriate. So security, strengthen yourself up.
See, our country has this kind of security. Thats the problem we haveTreat her very nicely please but she should now be taken out. Same person. One person. Its one person. They let her out. They gave her a second chance and the same thing happens.
But you would think that everybody were all on the same basket that everybody every single person  [interrupted by protester]
So you would think that if we could get together, wed all be in the same boat.
Now, last night we all saw and we witnessed something that I thought was highly inappropriate.
In fact, I tweeted "Is that all there is?" about the presidents speech and I wrote something today that I think is very, very salient, very important, and probably not politically correct but I dont care. I dont care.


You know, we had a situation in California very recently where somebody was making bombs in an apartment. The mother saw them. The mother didnt notice anything wrong. I watched the sister being interviewed. Believe me, in my opinion, she was lying like crazy. I watched that interview. "Oh, my brother was such a wonderful guy. I didnt know, I didnt know, I didnt know."
And I watched the next door neighbor saying, "Oh, well we didnt report them because we didnt want to racially profile or we didnt want to profile." Give me a break. Give me a break.
Were like the stupid country in so many different ways. Its so  can you imagine what our great leaders of the past would have said with the kind of crap thats happening with us?
They didnt want to report them because they thought it was profiling.
Okay, they saw bombs. They saw, you know, the pipe bombs only this wasnt to build a bathroom. When a bomb is this long, cant put too many of them together for a bathroom, right? And we thought they maybe but we didnt want to racially profile. Oh, okay, youre okay, youre innocent.
Or how about where the families and the girlfriends and the wives and everything and they go back to World Trade Center  the worst, worse than Pearl Harbor because with the World Trade Center they were killing innocent civilians. At least while it was a dirty, rotten sneak attack, at least they werebut while it was an attack, at least it was military. But this was an attack on the World Trade Center.
So, whats happened is were out of control. We have no idea whos coming into our country. We have no idea if they love us or if they hate us. We have no idea if they want to bomb us. We have no idea whats going on.
And then I looked at poll numbers and I dont mean polls where Im winning; those numbers I like looking at. These numbers I hated to look at. And its very, very sad.
Ill go after some of the numbers. 25% of those polled and this was from the Center for Security Policy  very highly respected group of people who I know actually.
This is people living in this country. 25% of those polled agreed that violence against Americans is justified as Muslims. 25%.
51% of the Muslims living in this country  by the way, I have friends that are Muslims; theyre great people. But they know we have a problem. They know we have a real problem. Because somethings going on, and we cant put up with it, folks. We cant put up with it.
51%  51% highly respected number of polling groups want to be governed according to Sharia. You know what Sharia is.
So I wrote this out. The mainstream media wants to surrender the Constitution. The mainstream media  these people back here. Theyre the worst. They are so dishonest. No, no, theyre so dishonest. They are so dishonest.
I mean, I have one from NBC, a reporter from NBC, and actually another one from CBS, they actually in Columbus, Ohio, I had a tremendous crowd like 10,000 people. It was a love fest. It went on for a long time. Everybody stayed right tis the end. I had one of the politicians  Kasich  who is just getting  hes a horrible debaterHe made a statement that "Oh, they left after 10 minutes." Now, the press was there. They saw it. Nobody said it was a lie. It was a total lie. In fact, I had more people at the end than I had at the beginning. Nobodys leaving. Nobodys leaving here except for the one person that was screaming.
So, we asked the press to report that it was a total lie and they didnt want to do that because its not their thing to do.
You know, we get the biggest crowds. They dont want to show this crowd tonight. Theyre not going to show all the people outside trying to get in. They dont do that. They have the cameras right in my face. I say fan the crowd just to show  look at all the people over here. Its a record in the history of this ship. But they dont show it. They dont show it. No, no. And I say fan it and they never ever fan it. I say fan the crowd and they never fan it. And yet, I guarantee you that that young woman that just got taken out after interrupting us three times, I guarantee the cameras will be on her. I guarantee. Its disgusting. Disgusting.
And by the way, some of the medias terrific but most of it 70%, 75% is absolute dishonest, absolute scum. Remember that. Scum. Scum. Theyre totally dishonest people.


I had one the other day where I finished the speech and they said "Oh, Trump was interrupted and he left early." I spoke for like 45, 50 minutes. I then answered questions and then I went around, you know, everybody knew it was false.
Amazingly, theres a media group that calls the media and the next day they did the most beautiful story about what a lie it was from NBC. Shes back there. Little Katie. Shes back there. What a lie it was. No, what a lie  Katie Tur  what a lie it was from NBC to have written that. It was a total lie. And they did a story where they  I didnt know they had a group like this where they actually criticized the media. And they said it was a total lie. And I loved it. I loved it. I loved it.
And then other people pick it up. You know its NBC so somebody picks it up. Third rate reporter. Remember that. Third rate. Third rate.
So I said here the mainstream media wants to surrender our Constitution and our constitutional rights. And I dont want that. I want ISIS to surrender. Okay? I want ISIS to surrender. Very simple.
Its very simple. So heres what happened. Its been a little controversial. Its been a great day because the poll numbers are through the roof. I like that.
But I have moreI wish we could call  is there any way we could call the election tomorrow? Wouldnt you love that?
Now theyre coming at us in full force. Theyre coming  not coming at me. Theyre coming at all of us. Theyre coming at all of us. Because you know, we have a noisy majority. They used to call it the quiet majority. People are fed up. Theyre fed up with incompetence. Theyre fed up with stupid leaders. Theyre fed up with stupid people.
They are fed up with stupid people, where our president makes a deal for Sergeant Bergdahl, a dirty, rotten, no good traitor who  think of it. They knew he was a traitor because a general and a colonel went to see his group. Six people were killed looking for him. Okay? Six people were killed. Young. Unbelievable. I watched the parents on television. Ive seen the parents. But I watched the parents on television devastated, will never be the same. They left to try to bring them back. He left. He deserted.
You know, in the old days when we were strong country it would be boom, gone. It was called desertion. Now I heard the other day they wont even do anything to him. Can you believe it? They think hes going to get away with nothing. Hes going to have nothing.
So he left. Oh, they treated him pretty rough though. He got in there, he said, "I shouldnt have done this. This isnt working out the way I thought."
Anyways, so we get him back and heres the deal we made. We get a dirty, no good traitor. Six people killedThey get five of their greatest killers that theyve been after  after  think of it for six years. In fact, I hear nine years.
So they get these  right now have gone  theyre out in the battlefield, trying to kill everybody in front of them including you folks, Id hate to tell you.
So we get Bergdahl and they get five of the killers that theyve wanted for many years. Thats the way we do it.
The Iran deal. We gave them $150 billion. Its called amateur night. We gave them $150 billion. 24 days  24 days  we think theres something wrong, 24 days we have to wait but its much longer than that because theres a whole process before the clock starts ticking. So it could be forever.
But the best is where they have the right to self-inspect. "Are you doing nuclear weapons over there?" "Oh, well inspect tomorrow." "Oh no, were not doing nuclear weapons."
You know, the Persians are great negotiators. Always have been. And somebody would say thats profiling. Trust me, theyre great negotiators.
And Kerry is a horrible negotiator and Obama is a horrible negotiator. Horrible. Hes a horrible negotiator. These people are horrible.
I always Obama would be a unifier. I never thought of him as being like a divider because I said "You know what? I dont think hes going to be a good president."
I backed McCain; he lost by the way. And you know, I dont blame McCain for losing because a lot of bad things will happen; it was a tough one. But I backed McCain; he lost. I backed Romney; he should have won but he sort of went away on vacation or something the last month and he lost. And I said, "This time Im going to do it myself. Were not going to lose." Were not going to lose. Were not losing.
And the recent Fox poll that just came out has me beating Hillary very easily one on one. I love that. Thats so important.


So, we put out a statement today. We watched this. And its impossible to watch this gross incompetence but I watched last night.
And we put out a statement a little while ago and these people are going crazy
Shall I read you the statement?
Donald J. Trump is calling for  now, youve got to listen to this because this is pretty heavy stuff and its common sense and we have to do it. Remember the poll numbers. 25%, 51%. Remember the poll numbers. So remember this. So listen.
Donald J. Trump is calling for a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States until our countrys representatives can figure out what the hell is going on.
We have no choice. We have no choice. We have no choice.
According to Pew Research, among others, there is a great hatred toward Americans by large segments of the Muslim population.
Most recently, a poll from Center for Security Policy released data showing 25% of those polled agreed that violence against Americans  these are people that are here by the way, people that are here  25% not 1%. By the way, 1% would be unacceptable. 1% is unacceptable. 25% of those polled agreed that violence against Americans here in the United States is justified as part  think of that  as part of the global jihad.
They want to change your religion. I dont think so. I dont think so. I dont think so. Not going to happen.
As part of the global jihad. And 51% of those polled agreed that Muslims in America should have the choice of being governed according to Sharia. You know what Sharia is. 51%.
Sharia authorizes  now look, this is, I mean, its terrible. Sharia authorizes such atrocities as murders against non-believers who wont convert, beheadings, and more unthinkable acts that pose great harm to Americans especially women. I mean, you look  especially women. Tough stuff.
And we have a president that wont even mention the term and youre talking about numbers like this.
Mr. Trump stated without looking at the various polling data, its obvious to anybody the hatred is beyond comprehension
Where the hatred comes from and why, well have to determine. Well have to figure it out. We have to figure it out. We cant live like this. Its going to get worse and worse. Youre going to have more World Trade Centers. Its going to get worse and worse folks.
We could be politically correct and we can be stupid but its going to get worse and worse.
Until we are able to determine and understand this problem and the dangerous threat it poses, our country cannot be the victim of horrendous attacks by people that believe only in jihad.
These are people only believe in jihad. They dont want our system. They dont want our system and have no sense of reason or respect for human life. They have no respect for human life.


So prior to Paris, which was a disaster, which by the way if some of the people in those places where it was slaughter, absolute slaughter, had guns, you wouldnt have had the carnage that you had in Paris. You wouldnt had that carnage. If they had guns, you wouldnt had that carnage.
So important the Second Amendment. We have to preserve it and cherish it. And we cant let these weak leaders diminish it.
If they had guns in Paris, if five people in that room, Paris and France has probably the toughest gun laws anywhere in the world and it was like target practice. "Come over here. Boom! Come over here. Boom!" People are sitting by the hundreds and many others are going to be dying. Theyre sitting in the hospital in many cases waiting to die.
Now, the same thing a few days ago in California. No guns. We didnt have guns. The bad guys had the guns.
And these young people  and I tell the press youve got to stop calling them "masterminds"  these are dirty, rotten scums. These arent masterminds.
Remember the guy in Paris with the big dirty hat? Remember the guy in Paris  the "mastermind". I was watching all the networks. I wont mention who but some of them disgusted me. "The mastermind is on the loose."
And we have kids that are watching the Internet and they want to be masterminds and then you wonder why do we lose all these kids  they go over there. Theyre young. Theyre impressionable. They go over there and they want to join ISIS.
And we have our anchors  I think I got them mostly stopped. Did you notice that? I dont hear it too much. But they say "the young mastermind". Oh, hes brilliant. Young man, hes brilliant.
I dont even hes got a high IQIn Paris, I call him the guy with the dirty filthy hat. Okay? Not a smart guy. A dummy. Puts people in there  mastermind  bing, bing, bing, its like shooting everybody. Youve got to be a mastermind.
So the press has to be responsible. Theyre not being responsible because were losing a lot of people because of the Internet.
And we have to do something. We have to go see Bill Gates and a lot of different people that really understand whats happening. We have to talk to them. Maybe in certain areas closing that Internet up in some way.
Somebody will "Oh, freedom of speech, freedom of speech". These are foolish people. We have a lot of foolish people. We have a lot of foolish people.
Weve got to maybe do something with the Internet because they are recruiting by the thousands. Theyre leaving our country. And then when they come back, we take them back. "Oh, come on back. Where were you?" "I was fighting for ISIS." "Oh, come on back. Go home. Enjoy yourself."
When they leave our country and they go to fight for ISIS or any of the other groups, they never come back. They never can come back. They never can come back. They can never, ever, ever come back. Its over.
How about that? And now that theyve become radicalized, theyre totally radicalized.
And how about the woman? She was in Pakistan then Saudi Arabia. She comes in on an engagement deal and she radicalized the guy. Probably a guy who couldnt get women. I dont know what the hell his problem is. Its probably the first women hes ever had. I dont know what was going on. But he became radicalized quickly. Notice how easy it is? He becomes radicalized and then they go on a spree.
Folks, those days are over. Those days are over. We have to be tough. We have to be smart. We have to be vigilant.
Yes, we have to look at mosques and we have to respect mosques. But yes, we have to look at mosques. We have no choice. We have to see whats happening because something is happening in there. Man, theres anger. Theres anger. And we have to know about it. We cant be these people that are sitting back like in the World Trade Center, like so many different things.
We cant be people that knew what was going on two weeks ago in California, probably for months they knew what was going on and they didnt want to tell anybody. We cant be that.
We have to be strong. When we see violations, you have to report those violations and quickly. Dont worry about profiling. I promise I will defend you from profiling. I promise.


So when I started this whole quest  I mean, who knew it was going to turn into this? Its been an amazing thing. No matter where I go, I have tremendous crowds, packed crowds, packed.
We went to Dallas  20,000 people in Dallas. 25,000 people. Mobile, Alabama  35,000 people. Here, every time I come to South Carolina, every time I go to North Carolina, every time I go to Iowa, New Hampshire, Virginia, wherever I go  Florida  we have crowds that are maxed. The only problem we have is the size of the room  thousands of people outside trying to get in. Usually I do a double. I go talk to them for a while, which I wouldnt say I exactly love doing after the first one.
But there is an unbelievable love in these rooms  all the same. I love you too. I love youThank you. Thank you. I love you too.
Theres an unbelievable love in all of these places  Oklahoma  20,000 people standing in a park on quick notice. Theres an unbelievable love. And theres an unbelievable love of the country. We want to see good things. We dont want to be bad people. We dont want to be tough and nasty. We believe in the Constitution more than anybody.
But we cant let people use and abuse our rights. We cant let people kill us. They want to kill us. They want to destroy us. We cant let it happen. We just cant let it happen.
And I have a friend whos a very, very successful man, and I went to one event  he came with me. We had 24,000 people. And this guys a real tough cookie. Hes a great financial guy. One of the guys Id definitely use to negotiate with Japan, China. Believe me, youre going to be in good shape when that happens. We wont have these characters.
You know, this whole thing with all of these guys. By the way, Im the only one thats self-funding my campaign. Everyone else is controlled. Only one. Im the only one. Only one.
Im self-funding my campaign. And these other guys. You know, theyre getting millions and millions of dollars from people I know.
I have one guy came and wanted to give me a lot of money. I said, "Honestly, I cant take it. I dont want to do." I cant take it, which is very sort of like for me to not take money  my whole life Ive been taking money. Now Im sort of like what am I doing? But came in and I said, "So what are you going to do? I dont want your money." And he said, "I got to go someplace else." Theyre like gamblers. Theyre like gamblers. But I said, "You like me best." "I like you best but Im going to go someplace else." Because they want to be part  they want to 
Let me tell you, who is more than me? I gave millions to these guys. Nobody knows the system better than me. I knew it from the other side. Dont forget, I was the fair-haired boy. I was like the establishment. Theyd all come to me, and Id give them all money I write checks sometimes to Senators whatever the max  bing, bing, bing.
I used to say "Senators, dont come to my office. Anybody thats a U.S. Senator that calls me, well send you a campaign contribution."
But you know what? Ill tell you something. In the end, the people that gives these millions of dollars to these horrible, corrupt PACS  theyre corrupt  they totally control Bush and Rubio and I wont say Cruz because hes been very nice to me. Nah, hes been nice. Hes got to hit me first. Once he hits me, I promise you. I promise you.
No, Ive been nice to Christie but he really hit me today. Chris Christie. I mean, I dont know. Hes a friend of mine but hes not doing well in the polls and he really, really hit me today. He hated this and yet he said anybody could come. Youve got to look at some of the statements from the past. But he really hit me on the whole thing that we have to stop the Muslims until we find out whats going on.
Does that make sense by the way? Until we find out.
And he talked about  thats inexperience and you know in other words he has experience right?
But thats the statement of an inexperienced manAbout we have to stop people that want to kill us from coming in. Does that sound like inexperienced?
So Chris, whos a friend of mine, he hit me hard. And I said I got to hit him at least once. So I wont do this a lot.
Look, heres the story. The George Washington Bridge. He knew about it.
Hey, how do you have breakfast with people everyday of your lives, theyre closing up the largest bridge in the world, the biggest in the United States, traffic flowing during rush hour. People couldnt get across for 6, 7 hours. Ambulances, fire trucks. Theyre with him all the time  the people that did it.


They never said, "Hey boss, were closing up the George Washington Bridge tonight." No, they never said that. Theyre talking about the weather, right?
He knew about it. He knew about it. Totally knew about it. Hes a got a very friendly group of people over there that they dont think so. But I dont know. Its called life. Youve got to be smart in life.
I would say theres less than 1% chance. It could be but I doubt it. He knew about it. They didnt mention at one of their meetings? I think they had breakfast like everyday or every other day. Theyd just say, "Chris, tonight were closing up the George Washington Bridge because the mayor a certain area is against you." "Oh, okay." They didnt mention? Nobody believes that.
Number two. Nine downgrades of the state. Nine downgrades. Its a disaster. I have property over there  the taxes are through  Ill use an expression  coming out of my ears, okay? Tremendous taxes over there. You had nine downgrades.
You had Christie, you know, so friendly with President Obama during the flood.
I actually called. I said, "Let me ask you. Is he going to vote for Obama?" I thought he was going to vote for Obama. I dont know. I think he possibly did.
And Romney I was very disappointed. One of the reasons I was disappointed was he called Christie and had dinner right after the election. If Christie did that to me, I would have never spoken to him again. I would have never done it.
So when Chris talks about  when he talks about lack of experience  I built this incredible company. I filed papers where everyone said "Wow, that is unbelievable." I would have probably filed them even when I didnt run because I built a great, great company. Tremendous cash. Tremendous assets. Tremendous net worth. Very little debt. Unbelievable cash flow. And I filed.
Everybody said "Number one, he wont run." And I ran. I took a deep breath and I said, "Lets go" to my wife and we came down that escalator. Right, the famous escalators. Hopefully in many years that will be a very famous scene because we will have turned around our country and that will be a positive note, okay?
But then they said, "Oh, well he announced." So these talking heads  most of whom are not even smart people, believe me. Then theyd say well, they went to Ivy League college. So did I go to Ivy League college. They went to this. Most of them didnt go to Ivy League colleges by the way but they say theyre brilliant. Ones brilliant because he wears glasses, you know? Like Perry. Remember Perry? We dont like him.
But what happens is they say "Well, hell never file form A." Thats basically where you sign your life away. I filed form A.
Then they said, "Well, hell never sign his financial statement because maybe hes not as rich as everybody thinks." Then they said, "And if he does, hell ask for many, many delays because youre entitled to 45 day delays, delays, and you can delay it until forever. And theyll delay it until after the election."
I said, "No" so I filed it ahead of schedule. And what happened? Remember? They went down. They couldnt believe it. It was much, much, much better than anybody ever envisioned.
I built a great company and the reason  honestly worth billions and billions of dollars. Remember that  low debt, great cash flow, and the greatest assets  Doral, Trump Tower, the Trump Building, big chunk of the Bank of America building in San Francisco, 1290 Ave., land all over, land on the Potomac, land all over.
In North Carolina, I have a great piece of property. Trump National Golf Club. Some of you know it. Great, right at the best location.
And what happens? What happens? So I filed and everyone said "Oh, I cant believe it."
Then they said "Well, maybe he wont do so well with the polls." And you know, before I went, people never believed I was going to run. They never thought I was going to run.
And I told the story the other night for really the first real time. But my wife said to me "You know if you run you will win. Dont you?" Shes very smart.
I said, "What do you mean?" She said, "If you dont run, youre never going to poll before. Nobody believes youre going to run." So if they do polls like they did these early polls, they werent great before I announced. She said, "No, the only way youre going to get a poll number is youve got to announce." Nobody believes even though they say, even though they say youre running, it doesnt matter. Nobody believes youre running.
So I said, "All right." Im getting these lousy early numbers and Im saying, "I dont know. I dont want to run and find out it doesnt work." I dont want to be embarrassed like Lindsey Graham and all these guys who have nothing. Its true. Its true.
So I said, "All right. Lets take it."
So we go down on the escalator. You know what I did? You remember I took a deep breath because Im telling you and you know what Im talking about the press down there look like the Academy Awards. There were so many cameras. I have never seen anything like it. The entire atrium of Trump Tower was packed with cameras and press. And I just said, "Lets go" to my wife.


I took a deep breath and I went down and I talked about lots of things, including illegal immigration.
And illegal immigration was such a big subject. And Im telling you had I not brought it up, it has turned out to be  and I took heat. I took heat like nobody has ever taken heat. Rush Limbaugh said "The most incredible incoming that Ive ever seen a human being endure". And then he doubled down a week later because I was right.
And now, illegal immigration is one of the biggest things.
And then you had the killing of Kate [Steinle] and the killing of Jamiel and the killing recently in California of a 66-year-old  think of it, 66-year-old  veteran, female, raped, sodomized and killed by an illegal immigrant. And many, many more. Its a huge problem.
And they take our jobs and a lot of other things.
So all of a sudden, everyones saying "Wow"and from almost at the beginning, youve seen Ive been at the top like from almost day one.
The reason I tell you certain things and the reason I talk about what Ive done and lots of good things. A little thing  Wollman ice skating rink. The city couldnt get it built for high years. They were in there for like $20 million. They couldnt get it done. I went to the mayor of New York, I said, "Ed Koch, Ill get it done real quick." He didnt like it because he didnt want to be shown up. I said Ill do it and if it costs more than $2 million Ill pay for it. I got it built for peanuts. Got it done in four months. And we had ice skating in Central Park and I still run it.
I did another one  I did a bigger version of that recently Ferry Point out in the Bronx. They were having  things have been under construction from anywhere between 20 and 30 years. They couldnt get it done. I got it done under a year. Its operating now. Its very successful.
Its what I do and thats what we need. Thats what we need in our country.
Im building on Pennsylvania Avenue an incredible hotel. One of the great hotels of the world. The Old Post Office site. Think of it. I got it in the Obama administration. Everybody was bidding. Everybody wanted it. One of the most sought after projects in the history of the GSA  general services. And I got it. Can you imagine me getting it from the Obama administration? Because the GSA, who are really professionals, they want to make sure number one that it got built. So they wanted strong financials. And they also wanted a great plan. So we came up with Ivanka and my kids we came up with this incredible plan. The job is under budget, ahead of schedule. It was going to open up in 17  sometime during the year 17. Now, its going to open probably in September of 16 right before the election on Pennsylvania Avenue.
And this is the kind of mindset you need.
Carl Icahn, one of the great businessmen, and others have endorsed me.
We have trillions and trillions of dollars offshore. Pfizers leaving the United States.
In the old days, somebody would leave for, frankly, South Carolina. Theyd leave New York or Florida or someplace where the taxes are lower. Theyd leave for North Carolina. Theyd leave  today theyd leave this country for other countries.
So now, were losing Pfizer. Were losing many of our great companies.
We have $2.5 trillion offshore at least. And everybody agrees it should come home  the Democrats, the Republicans. For three years, they cant make a deal. They cant make a deal because theres such gridlock. Theres no leadership in Washington.
We will make this country so great. We have people and Ill tell you something. Ill tell you something[interrupted by protester] said something to me the other day and what I really want to do  [interrupted by protester]  what we want to do or what I want to do is I want to be the peoples president.
Think of this, think of this, I dont work for any of the lobbyists. I dont work for any of these people that are leading our country in the wrong direction. We dont.
The best thing that Ive seen in going around and the thing that Ive seen more than anything else is how smart the people are. They dont believe those people in the back that write with fork. Im telling you, they dont believe them. The people are really smart.
Whats giving me more inspiration than any other single thing are the people that Ive met  the incredible people of this country.
Were going to make America great again. And you know what? Were going to make it greater, greater, than ever before. And I love you all and thank you very much. South Carolina. Great. Thank you! We love you. Thank you!


Thank you very much, everybody. You just like me because my daughter happens to be Jewish. Right? She has a great husband, Jared, and Ill tell you what Ivanka could not be happier and shes very proud. The only bad news, I cant get her on Saturday. I call and I call. I cant speak to my daughter anymore on Saturdays. But thats okay.
Its an honor to be with you. You know, Ive devoted so much time over my life to Israel, and the other politicians they can talk but believe me they havent done what Ive done. Ive received many, many awards.
I was the Grand Marshal of the Israeli Day Parade at a very dangerous time when people said, "Dont do it. Dont do it." I walked up Fifth Avenue. Im looking up for lots of trouble. But I said, "No way am I not going to do it." And it was a rough time as you know. It was 2004, and it was a tremendously successful parade. Maybe their most successful parade that they ever had.
So, Im in a different position than the other candidates because Im the one candidate I dont want any of your money; I want your support but I dont want your money.
Im self-funding my campaign. Its been an amazing experience for me because I have very little money invested so far.
I thought by this time Id have about 30 million in ads and I have none although I took a small radio commercial the other day in Iowa. But we have virtually no money in invested in ads or advertising. And I think you as business people will feel pretty good about this and respect it.
At first, I was embarassed by that. I said, "You know, I think were going to have spend money just to spend money" but its not really like a good thing to do because I am in first place by a lot. Its not even close. Every single poll, every single state.
The numbers just came in three minutes ago in New Hampshire  the PPP poll  Trump at 27%, the next one is 13%, 10%, 9%, 8%, 5%, and the rest are off the board. They have to drop out pretty soon I guess, right?
Most of importantly, favorability  no, I still like the top number the most but favorability is now at 50% to 39%, which is good, and I beat Hillary in the Fox poll as you see very easily 46% to 41%. Thats ultimately the most important.
And you know, Ive been a tremendous fan and Ive been a tremendous contributor. Ive given a lot of money recently to Hatzalah, $100,000, emergency response. They do a fantastic job.
And my father, Fred, was always a big supporter. So I grew up in that environment. I grew up in Brooklyn, Queens, and Israel was always very paramount in our mind.
In fact, Ive been sometimes criticized because I received so many awards from Jewish groups, and they look at my wall. Its loaded up. But now the Christians are catching up, I have to tell you.
My Christians are liking me a lot lately and theyve been great. They have been great.
So, Obama is the worst thing thats ever happened to Israel. The worst. The worst.
And when I see great friends of mine who are very, very pro-Israel, very  I mean, they love Israel. They love it with passion, and theyre having fundraisers for Obama. I said, "What are you doing?"
And its almost like they answer me and they say, "We dont know. He comes to New York. We dont know. We dont know." I said hes a disaster.
I really believe the Iran deal. Look, Im a negotiator like you folks. Were negotiators.
We dont build gas stations in the middle of, as you know, Afghanistan for $43 million  can you imagine this? A small gas station  $43 million  and then they used the wrong kind of terminal because they dont sell that type of gas. Okay? $43 million for a gas station.
How many think they could have done it for less? Would you raise your hands please?
But I look at Obama, I look at that deal where we gave to Iran $150 billion. They dont need to develop nuclear weapons; they can buy them. They can buy them. Its true. Why do they have to develop them? They can buy them. We gave them $150 billion.
They go out and in terms of, you know, surveillance, they have the right to self-inspect. How about that? On their major, most dangerous they can self-inspect.


Were going to let them self-inspect. And then you have of course the 24 days and the 24 days were all good with contracts dont start until such and such happens. It could be forever before you ever go into inspect.
And we dont even get our prisoners back.
And now they want to start a negotiation to get the prisoners back and they want 19 people for our three. They dont want to give us our four. You know we have four. But they only want to talk three.
Now, that should have been negotiated right at the beginning, three years ago.
And maybe better than any audience, I mean, the people in this room understand what Im saying. It should have been you walk in  by the way, did you ever see a negotiation take so long? And we conceded on every single. We didnt win anything. We didnt win anything.
But that should have been with our prisoners  day one, whatever it is years ago, we have to get our prisoners back. You dont want them. We need them. It will make us look better. Both everybody is going to like us more. With the American public, any deal that we strike, its going to look good.
And you say that. We have to get our prisoners back. Day one. Theyre going to say, "No, were not giving." And were going to say, "Bye bye. Bye! Call us when youre ready." And then we go out and double up and triple up the sanctions. I guarantee you within 48 hours theyre calling, begging us to come back to the table and you have your prisoners back. Its so easy.
Now, the president, you saw that, and John Kerry, who is probably the worst negotiator Ive ever seen. No, hes the worst negotiator Ive ever seen. He did not read The Art of the Deal, folks, I can tell you that. Now, hes one of the few. Hes one of the  biggest selling of all time business book of all time, he didnt read it. And Obama definitely didnt read it. Obama, ayeyeye. Oh.
But they said  this is hard to believe but this is what they said  a lot of press back there so I have to say everything exactly correct because if I dont I end up with a  they said we didnt want to complicate the negotiations by asking for the prisoners. Its really complicated. We want our prisoners back. Oh, so complicated. They said they didnt want to complicate  so now, were going to end up making a new deal probably at some point.
Id tell you this, look Ill just tell you this: If I win, before I take office, I guarantee you those prisoners are going to be back. Theyre going to be back, I guarantee you. Theyre going to be back.
Now, our president doesnt want to use the term  we had another event, which probably was  the one yesterday  probably was related. It always happens but it probably was. When I heard about it, I figured maybe not. But it turns out probably was related  radical Islamic terrorism. And Ill tell you what, we have a president that refuses to use the term. He refuses to say. Theres something going on with him that we dont know about.
Now, as far as Hillarys concerned, shes going to go with what he wants.
She shouldnt be allowed to run. What she did is criminal with the emails. She shouldnt be allowed to run.
Shes going to have to follow his line because shes on a thread. You know, look, in real life, his Attorney General, his U.S. Attorney, his Attorney General. So his Attorney General is going to listen to him in my opinion. I think its very dishonest whats going on with our government.
Gen. [David] Petraeus was given a life-changing sentence. Other people have been sent to jail. Petraeus was, you know, essentially  look, I dont want to get into it with the poor guy. What he went  for nothing, compared to what she did for nothing, for 5% of what she did.
And Obama, I mean, she cant go against him because only does boom she gets indicted. Thats the end of it. Thats the end of it.
So when you see Hillary backing up virtually everything he says, and hes got control of her. I mean, its just total control.
But Ill tell you what, she shouldnt be allowed to run. What she did was a criminal act.
And remember this, this is a six-year  you have a six year statute of limitations. So shes fighting for her life. If she doesnt become president, she could have a real problem. Does that make any sense to anybody? Does that make sense to anybody?
Because what she did was just wrong. Okay? And you know shes been involved in corruption her whole life, whether its Whitewater. I mean, her whole life is corruption.


She was a horrible Secretary of State. She did a horrible job other than traveled a lot. She traveled a lot, nothing ever got done. The whole  the world blew up around her. It blew up.
500 to 600 calls and emails and everything from our ambassador asking for help and she didnt respond.
The truth is she doesnt have the strength or the energy. She responded to her friends. You know the friends were talking about. Some of those friends are, you know, sort of an interesting friend going on there.
But she responded  yeah, you get that, right? A lot of people dont get that.
But she responded to a friend, but she doesnt respond to an ambassador thats asking for help. Hundreds  hundreds of requests and she doesnt respond.
Now, remember this, I go every night to someplace. I mean, yesterday I was in Manassas, Virginia, we had an unbelievable crowd.
The other day I was in Florida, we had 12,000 people in Sarasota at 12 p.m. with the football games going on. 12,000 people. The convention center held 5,000. So we had thousands outside. I made a speech outside. I made two speechesI said, "You cant get me a larger convention center so I can do one speech?" My people said, "No, this is the biggest one. We set a record  a big record. We set a record everywhere. We beat the record of Elton John. Its true. Elton John. Im no longer competing with politicians. Im competing with the musical talent.
One of the great musicians said "You get the largest crowds of any single human being on Earth without a guitar" meaning who doesnt count on music.
So its true, weve had tremendous response. Weve had incredible response.
I think you know if you look at whats going on and I think based on the response, based on the polls  again I dont want your money therefore youre probably not going to support me because stupidly you want to give money. Trump doesnt want money therefore we cant  even though hes better than all these guys, even though hes going to do more for Israel than anybody else, even though Bibi Netanyahu asked me to do a commercial for him and I did and he won his race, so I was very happy about that. But he asked me to do a commercial. And they said I was the only celebrity. I dont know if thats  but they said Im the only celebrity. I dont know. Im not a celebrity. See now Im a politician. Im so embarrassed by that term.
You know, my how life Ive been a business, Ive been a developer. Ive employed tens of thousands of people over my lifetime. I have unbelievable statements and unbelievable company.
A lot of people said, "Oh, hell never file." This youll get a kick out of. "Hell never run because hell never want to file various papers. And then hell never file this and that and then youd have to sign your life away." The first paper  we all know about first papers. You sign your life away. Thats the end of it. He did it.
Then they said, "Well, hell never sign and hell never file his financials because who knows, maybe hes not as rich as people think."
So I filed my financials  almost 100 pages. The biggest ever filed by the federal elections. And everybody said, "Oh my, its much bigger and much stronger and holy mackeral, look at these numbers!"
If I didnt run, Id probably would have filed anyways because you know I built a great company and I like to brag about it whenever possible. Its true.
Some of the greatest assets  Doral, you know, Doral and Turnberry in Scotland and Trump Tower and many buildings in Manhattan. Just many  Bank of America building in San Francisco with a great partner and so many other buildings and things
And the reason I bring that up is because thats the kind of thinking we need.
And I dont bring it up as braggadocio. I bring it up because thats the kind of thinking we need in this country to bring us back. We have people that dont know the first thing about the word negotiation.
I can take anybody in this office, believe me, and theyre better than Obama and theyre better than Kerry and theyre better than the foolish people  the foolish people. Its so embarrassing when you see what happens.
Sergeant Bergdahl, all right? Sergeant Bergdahl  we get a traitor; they get five of the greatest killers that theyve wanted for nine years. You know, the deal was five for one.
And they knew he was a traitor before we made the deal. You know about Sergeant Bergdahl. He deserted. Six people were killed trying to get him back. They were looking for him.
The general and the colonel went to see all those people, they said, "No, he deserted. He was a traitor." And we still made the deal.
So we get a traitor. We can give him back. Do you want to re-negotiate deals? Some of us will re-negotiate deals. I would say about 99.9  is there anybody that doesnt re-negotiate deals in this room? This room negotiates so I want to re-negotiate  perhaps more than any room than Ive ever spoken. Maybe more. Its okay. Ive been called on that a couple of times too.


But the fact is I want to renegotiate that deal. I want to drop him right smack in the middle of where he came from. The hell  they can have him even if we dont get the five guys back because thats not going to happen because you know where they are right now? Theyre right now all in the battlefield fighting us and trying to kill us and kill anybody that gets in.
So they get their five guys that theyve wanted for nine years theyve wanted them and we get a dirty rotten traitor. But thats the way our people negotiate. Theyre stupid people. Okay? Theyre stupid people.
Its very sad. Its very sad.
So Ill just tell you that Im going to win. I am. Im going to win. I mean, unless something happens, you know, walk across the street, the wrong thing happens. But Ill tell you what, I have a great secret service. Heres a nice one, youre number one, they give you a secret service. I never saw so many people  talented people, great people.
But I believe Im going to win. I really have just a great feeling about it. And you know, my life has been about winning. Ive won, and my life has been about winning, and thats what I want to do for the country.
And if people say about my company and deals and you can do this deal or that deal, I have no interest.
Its like the other day  Ivanka, shes doing so great. "Dad, we can buy this wonderful office building and I said, "Honey, who cares? How can you talk to me about such trivial things, Ivanka?" Its amazing. See? Now Im dealing in trillions. Ive never heard of trillions before. You know, with this  we owe $19 trillion.
We just signed a budget thats so bad and the Republicans  you know, we know where the Democrats are coming from. But these Republican politicians, they go to Washington and theyre going to end Obamacare, which Im going to do by the way  Im ending, Im terminating, its going to be repealed and replaced with something much better. But they go to Washington and theyre going to do this and theyre going to do budgets  like I heard the guy before "Were going to work in the budget." Its all about that. What happens is theyre going to do budgets like were going to do this and that and I tell this story  then they walk into the Capitol Building, which is magnificent, and they look up "Darling, oh my, look at those columns, look at the ceiling, look at the angels. Oh, look at these magnificent floors." Theyve never seen anything like it. "Weve arrived. This is incredible." And then they become mainstream. "Well vote on Obamacare. Yes, I vote." They dont want to leave. They lose all of their courage. I want to use a nice word because otherwise theyd get reported for foul language. They lose all of their courage and theyve let us down. That wont happen with me.
So, again, youre not going to support me even though you know Im the best thing that could ever happen to Israel and Ill be that. I know why youre not going to support me and you know youre not going to support me because I dont want your money. Isnt it crazy? No, its true.
You know, if I wanted to have your money, I think Id have a damn good chance and I think Id get more money than anybody else.
Do you know the money I have turned down? This has not been my life turning down money. Guys want to give me millions.
I would have made  poor Jeb Bush, I mean, this poor guy with his low energy. Its sad. No, its sad.
I came up with that term, it became so defining. Its like having it on his forehead "I am low energy". No, no, its sad.
He raised $125 million, which means hes controlled totally, totally controlled by the people that gave him the money.
Thats why you dont want to give me money, okay? But thats okay. You want to control your own politician. Thats fine. Good. Fine. Think about that, folks. Dont worry about it.
I understand. Hey, five months ago, I was with you. Whos better than me? Who is better than me? I gave $350,000 to the Republican Governors Association. I never even gotten a letter of thank you. Its true. $350,000. I didnt receive one letter, not one letter from one governor. Stupid. The good thing is I dont give any  why would I give any more? You dont get a thank you letter.
Politicians  remember this  politicians forget, politicians generally arent competent, and the one thing they are good at is getting elected and thats what youre going to end up having.
But I would love your support but I dont want your money. I appreciate it. Now, lets take some questions. Okay? Good.


Im going to go there right after this. I have to go through  you know, you have to watch to make sure that the contractors arent stealing and ripping you off and everything else.
But to show you how important this forum is and how important the country is to me and how important Israel is to me, its so important, I dont mention my projects. Its not like very important to me anymore.
Whats really important to me is the United States and making it great again.
My theme is Make America Great Again. I mean, its taken off like crazy. The hats  its going crazy.
But you know, some of these guys try to copy it but I had it trademarked because were smart.
A couple of them got up. No, you see, I was making this speech and everybody stood up  make America great again But nobody stood up to them. But we sent them a little notice  dont use that term. Were trademarked.
Can you imagine I got the approval?
But we are  were building a great hotel down the road. I hope you all stay and its going to be wonderful


So I was interviewed yesterday by a whole group of reporters from AP and they did a very good job. Very fair story.
And one of the questions was about Israel and the Palestinians whats going to happen.
I said  I used that as an example of some deals that are maybe the hardest deal ever in history to makeCan we think of any deals? We all have tough deals, right? You know, we have some good, some bad
But I said people are going to have to make sacrifices one way or the other.
I believe  because Im a dealmaker  I believe that I can put both sides together.
But I said, itll take six months. At the end of six months and maybe sooner  with us we have a deal instinct. A lot of us. And you can walk into a room and you can almost tell like in two seconds whether or not youre going to make a deal.
I will know very quickly whether or not Ill be able to put that deal together.
I used that in this interview as an example of perhaps the hardest deal in history to put together. Theres probably no tougher deal.
If I could do that, it would make me so happy because theres so much violence, so much death, and just been going on for so many years.
Now, I said you have to have a commitment to make it. I dont know that Israel has the commitment to make it, and I dont know that the other side has the commitment to make it.
With that being said, you know, I have a good chance of winning because you look at whats going on. So I have a good chance. I dont like to as a dealmaker give away a lot of cards by talking about how I feel about this or that. Id rather save it for that moment when you walk into the room. I dont want one side or the other saying.
Look, I think people know where I stand. But wouldnt it be great if they could make a deal? But a lasting deal, a real deal. Not a phony deal thats going to last a week and then bad things started happening again.
Id love to  and I will give it. You know Obama, as you know he said it wont happen, meaning he gave up on this before it even started.
But I think it would be a great thing for Israel  I think it would be a great actually for both sides if a real deal could be made, and Im going to give it my best.
Im a great dealmaker. Thats what I do. I made a lot of money. Im going to give it my best. It would be great if that deal could be made.

By the way, Israel has given a lotAnd a lot of people dont know that. I think the public relations for Israel hasnt been so great because Israels given a lot but hasnt been given a lot of credit for what theyve given
In fact, some things have been given which were unthinkable and a lot of turmoil it caused in Israel. There were things given. But Id like to go in with a clean slate and just say lets go, everybodys even, we love everybody, and lets see if we could do something.
But I do think this  and I do think right from the beginning and that one of the reasons Im saying it now even though perhaps it comes back to haunt me later on it has to be said that Israel has given a lot. I dont know whether or not they want to go that far in a little step and you know thats going to be up to them. But Israel has not been given the credit that they deserve for what theyve done. I will say that. I will say that. So thats it.


You know what I want to do? I want to wait until I meet with Bibi. You know, Im leaving for Israel in a very short period of time. I know. I know what youre saying. I just  youre not going to be  whos the wise guy?
Do me a favor. Just relax. Okay? Youll like me very much, believe me. Okay? And you wonder why you get yourself in trouble. All right? Youre going to like me very much. Its going to be fine.
But again, you cant go in with that  if youre going to make a deal and you could make a great deal  you cant go in with the attitude were going to shove it down. Youve got to go in and get it and do it and do it nicely so everyones happy. Dont worry about it. Youre going to be very happy. Okay? Dont worry about it.


I think hes a very good man. I think hes been treated very badly. I think that our president has been unbelievably rude to Bibi. I dont know how many people like Bibi. But I think hes been unbelievably rude.
And  I mean, well talk about deals after the fact, which is a shame but I think the Iran deal is the worst single thing.
Perhaps itll go down  and Ive been pretty good at predicting things. I think its going to go down as the worst single thing thats ever happened to Israel. I think its a catastrophe for Israel.
And I think the fact that Obama was willing to make that deal for anybody that loves Israel to support this guy or even the Democratic Party is impossible to believe.
I think it will be one of the great catastrophes.
But if I get in, I will straighten it out, believe me. Its going to be straightened out. Its going to be straightened out tough and its going to be straightened out fast.
The one bad thing is if I get in, the $150 billion is gone. That hurts me and that hurts the people of Israel. But the $150 billion is gone because itll be gone before you get there.
You know, were talking about a year and more actually. Although the election very quick. You know, its coming up. Its now less than a year and you know we have the Iowa starts on February 1st and then we go right down the line and its very exciting. Were talking about a couple of months now for it to start.
For a person like me, I mean, its very exciting.


Well, I havent been working too much with the Arab leaders, to be honest with you. Okay?
You know, I told you I made commercials for Bibi. I dont know if thats going to help me in the negotiation. I can tell you. You know, Im trying to keep it nice and level, right? Then I get people screaming at me. But Im trying to keep it as level as possible but I for the most part dont know.
The King of Jordan seems like a nice man. I mean, I dont know. Were going to see. A lot of people like him; some people dont.
But I think I will probably be able  what my history  you know, I took some heat because I get along with Democrats, I get along with liberals, I get along with conservatives, I get along with Republicans. I get along with everybody. Thats what I was  Im a businessperson. I get along with everybody. We have to get along with everybody.
And I took some heat and I always explained that. I said, "Wait a minute, Im a businessperson. Ive got to get along with everybody." I live in Manhattan. Its all Democrat. I mean, its virtually all  Republicans dont even run people for the most part and if they do they get 5%. You know, they get a very small percentage of the vote. Got to get along with everybody.
I think thats going to be a tremendous asset because right now we have gridlock in Washington. We have people that  they dont talk.
You know, I remember that years ago because Ive been a very political person on the other side but always very political.
But years ago, the Republicans and the Democrats  they used to like each other. Theyd get along. Theyd have dinner together. Theyd argue and theyd fight and theyd disagree and would have, you know, different views and things.
But in the evening, theyd go out and theyd have dinner together with their families. You dont see that anymore.
Theres total hatred and theres total gridlock.
Ill give you one point, which I think is important. Corporate inversions. Right? So you have companies leaving the United States and theyre leaving because of better taxes and better a lot of things. A lot of things are better. But theyre leaving. Pfizer. How good is Pfizer? Thousands and thousands of jobs are going to be lost.
But theyre also leaving because we have $2.5 trillion at least  I think its a much higher number than that. $2.5 trillion  thats out of the country that these companies cant get back because of bureaucracy and horrible trade agreements but because the taxes are too high. Theyre so onerous that nobody in this room would agree to pay that much money to get your money out.
So they leave it over there and they actually take the company and they move the company to the money because thats how much money.
The Republicans and the Democrats totally agree that the money should come back. For three years they cant get a deal. Theres no leadership. Its gridlock.
Theres an example of something where everybody agrees  all the people that you see up here they all agree but they cant get it done because theyre politicians. Theyre all talk; theyre no action.
So theres something and its so important. Its not like something where they dont get  like theres big disputes and we understand that. This is something everybody agrees  the money should pour into this country and we should use the money and all the things  taxes paid.
But they agree and they cant get it doen because of gridlock and incompetent leadership.


You know, honestly, I dont think anybody can say. She says she is. But now she says all of a sudden maybe less so than you thought because shes going very, very far over to the other side.
I mean, Bernie Sanders has brought her to positions that she didnt want to be at. You look at some of the things that shes saying right now.
But Ill tell you what, whether she is or not, she doesnt have the strength or the energy to help Israel. Im telling you she doesnt.
But just take a look. Shell come out and do an event and you dont see her for another four days, three days, five days. No, its true.
Think of it. We dont need  some people say its not nice to say. She doesnt have the strength or the energy.
Israel needs more than just our support. They need strength. They need real power behind them.
Because you know, you look at as these countries fall over there, Israels looking more and more  you know, Israel has some difficulties.
And one thing and I think youll all admit it. These people are fighting really dirty but they fight a lot better than we used to think. Right? We used to think "Oh, that was easy."
15 years ago with my friends from Israel because I have a lot of friends from Israel, they used to smile and laugh "Oh, dont worry about it." Now theyre saying, "These guys are  theyre dirty fighters." And theyre not bad. You know, theyre tough. Theyre not the JV. Okay? Obama said theyre the JV. Theyre not the JV folks.
We need tough. We need General George Patton. We need General MacArthur. We dont need the guys we have. I see them on television  generals. I dont want my generals on television saying "Well, ISIS is very tough."
I saw a guy the other day. ISIS is very tough. I dont know. I dont need that.
Do you think General George Patton  they dont like him because he was a foul mouth vicious horrible brilliant guy. So he would never make it. They probably would have had him thrown out years ago.
But we need Patton. We need a genius like MacArthur.
And we have those people. We have those people. Ill find that person.
But were going to knock the crap out of them, Ill tell you what. Were going to win. Were going to win. Were going to win.


Well, I think radical Islam right now is, and I feel thats the greatest. And again, we have a president who refuses to use the term.
But radical Islam is  Ill tell you one thing I know isnt is global warming. Thats the one thingI know isnt.
I mean, we have a guy that just the other day who said  here they want to blow everything  this is right after Paris. They want to blow our cities up. They want to destroy our civilization, and hes worried about global warming, which a lot of people think is a hoax.
By the way, I won so many environmental awards shockingly. No, its true.
And you know what I want to do? I want really immaculate air. I want clean, crystal water. I want a lot of things. Okay? I want a lot of things.
But global warming  you noticed they changed the name  they go global warming, they go climate change, they go  now I hear a lot of extreme weather. How can you miss with extreme weather, right? If its cold, its okay. If its hot, its okay. If its windy, if its hot  everything is extreme. So now they use extreme weather. It is a disgrace whats going on.
And to have this man embarrass us by standing up and saying that global warming is our biggest threat, we got to get him out so fast and thank goodness we only have a year left.
Thank you. Thank you very much everybody.




Its a great honor. I want to thank Simon and Schuster, one of the most magnificent publishers. For years and years, Ive heard about Simon and Schusters being a fabulous  I was going to say the Rolls-Royce, I was going to say the Harvard or the Yale, but they really are a great one. And I want to thank you very much. Youve given us such tremendous support.
And we did this quickly and I think we did it very effectively. Its been an incredible experience.
We wrote a book and the title  "Crippled America"  is very tough but unfortunately we have to do what we have to do and I think one of the reasons weve been doing so well in the campaign is because we tell it like it is. We tell the truth.
And America is crippled. We owe $17 [trillion] and now $18 [trillion] and now its actually very soon going to be $19 trillion in debt.
We have a military that doesnt have proper instruction from leadership. We dont know what were doing. Were losing all over the world with trade deals. Every country, no matter what country you talk about, you can just pick a name out of a hat, theyre beating us in trade.
And we cant go on like this any longer. Its impossible to go on like this any longer.
I always mention as an example Sergeant Bergdahl, a traitor. We get Sergeant Bergdahl; they get five of the people they wanted and they wanted badly. And thats not the way its going to work anymore.
So we write about it in the book. We tell lots of different stories of lots of different things. And I think its going to be very instructional, very important.
To me, it was instructional.
When I did "The Art of the Deal", I think one of the reasons it was so successful is that it was largely instructional. Even today when I speak, so many people hold up the book "The Art of the Deal" and the other books weve done.
So this is one that probably not since the Art of the Deal, I have to tell this to Louise and Simon and Schuster, have I worked so hard on a book and it was in a confined period of time. We wanted to get it out really, really quickly so that it pertain to whats going on right now. Its a moment of time. And we got it done.
And David did a fantastic jobAnd all of my people did a great job. They helped me so much because we are doing a couple of other things right now. So this was not easy getting this in.


But we see by the lines  the lines go down to Park Avenue. Theyve been forming since last night and Im going to be signing books starting at 12 p.m. Were doing a couple of interviews and then were signing books starting at 12 p.m. and thatll be very exciting for me.
But we have fans that have bought the book and they just bought it and some have been online now for 12 and 14 hours. I dont know how theyre doing this but they do it. They find a way.
So Im looking forward to getting to the signings.







Well, I think its a different book. You know, we just had polls come out today from Iowa where Im leading. You saw the new poll from Iowa. You saw the new poll in New Hampshire where Im leading big.
A poll just came out in Florida where Im leading big. Georgia, Texas. I mean, all over the place.
And I think you know look were doing well. And if you add Ben and myself were beating everybody by a lot. That seems to be the big story that were beating  they call it the establishment. Its called really the failed establishment because the establishment has let us down.
But I dont know. I dont know how his book is doing.






Well, I think my book is very hard-hitting. His is a different kind of book and hes a different kind of a person. My book is very hard-hitting. It says it like it is. And based on what Simon and Schusters just told me, its selling like hotcakes. So well see.






Were very different people. We have very different qualities and we are extremely different. And Im different from all of the other candidates.
Look, nobody can negotiate trade deals like me.
We are going to take the $400 billion a year that were losing with China, thats going to be turned around. The $75 billion a year that were short on with Japan.
The $50 billion a year that we lost to Mexico. And thats right, there will be a wall built. It will go up. It will be built. And people will come into the country legally.
So I mean, much different than  youre look at Marco Rubio  very, very weak on illegal immigration.
You look at Ben and hes very weak on immigration and he wants to get rid of Medicare. I mean, Ben wants to get rid of Medicare. You cant get rid of Medicare. Itd be a horrible thing to get rid of. It actually works. You get rid of the fraud, waste, and abuse. It works. So when a man is weak on immigration and wants to get rid of Medicare, I dont know how he stays here.






No, I think that really Marco is over-rated. And frankly had Bush been a better messenger, he has the better message. I mean, if that was me delivering that message it would have been a much different story because he hasnt been able to  Marco doesnt show up to the United States Senate. Hes representing the people of Florida, which by the way that poll just came out today and Im way up in Florida over everybody.
But Marco is a sitting Senator and he doesnt show up for the people of Florida, and I dont think he should be doing that.
Now, Bush gave a very weak message. I agree with that. It was poorly delivered. But the facts are on Bushs side and ultimately I think Marcos going to be hurt very badly.
And if you look at Mr. Singer, you have to see where Mr. Singer is coming from and when you see where hes coming from, I think people are going to say, "Whoa, we didnt know that."
But look at Marcos stance on illegal immigration. Its really trouble for him. I dont see how he can win.






Marco Rubios personal finances are discreditAll you have to do is look at his credit card. I mean, he is a disaster with his credit cards. And Ill tell you what, I love Florida. Im in Florida all the time. And for years, Ive been hearing that his credit cards are disaster. I would think that when you take a look at it, you would find that.
But his credit card debt and his problems with credit card and what he did when he was running the party apparatus with credit cards, Ive heard about it for years. Youll have to find out.






Well, he has a very bad record of finances if you look at what happened with his houses, with his  you know, he certainly lives above his means. Theres no question about that.


Ill tell you what. On the debates, its very interesting. Because I dont really care that much. I want a room. I want a podium. And lets get going. Because I dont really care that much.
But a lot of the people that are candidates who I respect  many of them, not all of them  but I respect many of them, they felt it was very unfair because Hillary Clinton was given all soft balls. I mean, she wasnt asked one tough question. They didnt talk about her foundation. They didnt talk about any of the problems. They didnt talk about the emails. When the email problem came up, Bernie Sanders lost his whole campaign. I mean, what he did was so stupid from his standpoint. In order to get a one-minute soundbite of some applause, he gave up the emails. That was end of his campaign.
First of all, people arent going to his rallies anymore. Hes finished.
So unless something happens to her with respect to the emails, shell easily be the candidate.
But I will say this: She only got softballs. Thats all she got.
And if you look at the way we were treated, it wasnt the same way.
With that being said, I dont really care.






Well, I think the Republicans actually are doing a pretty good job overall. They coalesced at that last debate because I mean, it really started with me. The guy asked me a question. I think Harwood is probably finished as a credible reporter. Hes a disaster. And he was  it was such as horribly put question and so obvious.
And the Republicans coalesced around each other. It was actually pretty beautiful when you think about it.
And all we want to do is to be treated fairly.
But with me, I dont care that much. Just give me a podium.
What I would say is this: The networks have made a fortune because of me, not because of anybody else.
You know, they were saying that the last cycle, they had 2 million and 1 million people and the networks didnt even want to broadcast it because nobody watched. Okay? Nobody wanted to watch.
Now, they have 25 million people, 24 million people, 23 million people and 16 million people. I mean, give me a break.
So somebody said, "How did they get there?"
And actually Variety and Hollywood Reporter, who do report this stuff pretty well  much better than the political press  they said "solely for one reason  it was Trump". Ill take the credit.
But Ill tell you what I also want. I think that Wounded Warriors and our veterans should be given some of the enormous profits being made on these debates  enormous profits  by the way beyond anything theyve ever envisioned.
CNN was going to get $2,000 for a 30 second ad. They ended up getting $250,000. So they went from $2,000 to $250,000 for a 30 second ad.
The networks and the cable are making a fortune, and I think they should give some of the profits to the Wounded Warriors and the veterans. Thats what I want.






Im giving them away. Im giving the profits of my book  Im giving them away to a lot of different  including the vets.






I have been amazing with respect to the hiring of women. This building was built as the head person who was fantastic by a woman and that was at a time when you didnt see that in the construction trades. I mean, it was totally unique.
I have many, many executives upstairs and in different buildings that I have that are women. Many  a proportion thats close to 50%. Might even be over 50% if I analyze it. And they get paid a lot of money  in many cases more than men doing the same job.
So women have always appreciated that about me. Ive been in terms of employment really a standout and Ive been honored for doing so well with women.






What Jeb Bush was saying at the last debate? I dont know. But he didnt say it well.






I like Telemundo by the way. I like it better than Univision. Im suing Univision for $500 million.
Because the country is doing so poorly. Its a very accurate title because the country is doing so poorly.








Thats good. Theyre going to have some demonstrations. Oh, good because itll get even higher ratings if they do that. I think its fine. I think they should demonstrate. Ratings will go even higher than they are going to be. Its going to be one of the highest rated shows ever. And theyre very excited about it.
And I have a great relationship, as you know from Telemundo, with the Hispanics. Youve treated me actually very fairly. Won the poll recently in Nevada. Won other polls. And in Nevada, I think I got 37% and leading everybody.
So I have a great relationship with the Hispanics. I have working for me thousands right now  thousands of Hispanics. Ive had tens of thousands of people over the year working for me. Im a job machine. Im a job machine.
And one of the things that does come out in every single poll and every single survey is that nobody for the economy nobody is even close. Im two, three, and you see that  two, three, four, five times greater than anybody else.
And youd almost say like its about the jobs, its about the economy. Then hows anybody going to beat Trump in all fairness?
But Ive had a great relationship with the workers. Ive had a great relationship with jobs. And Ive had an amazing relationship with the Hispanics. And I predict that Im going to win the Hispanic vote.






I think Im going to win the Hispanic vote. I predict, yeah, I think Im going to get the nomination and I will win the White House. I think beating Hillary Clinton is going to be easy because her record is so bad.




Thats the question I like. How am I preparing for my SNL? Well, Im meeting with Lorne Michaels in a little while. Afterwards, were going to sign  I guess got thousands of people on line but were going to sign and then later on this evening Im meeting with Lorne Michaels and the whole staff and well start the preparation. Well pick our skits. Am I nervous? Not too nervous. Not too nervous. But were going to do a good job and were going have a fantastic show. Were all going to have a lot of fun.






My Jeb impression? No, I dont want to do that. I dont like showing a person sleeping at the podium.






Tom is asking "Can Jeb make a comeback?" I think its going to be very hard. Very hard. Not about money. I just think  you know, I came up with the energy. And I just think we need tremendous energy because we need a person that has tremendous personal energy to get us back on track. You cant do that when you dont have that.
I think Marco is highly overrated. Highly overrated. He doesnt have it and all you have to do is look at his stance on things.
Jeb  he lacks the quality that you need.
Were talking about everybody in the world is ripping us off. You need a very strong person with tremendous energy. Thank you very much folks, Ill take the job.
But and its so important. And by the way, Ben Carson does not have that energy.
We need somebody with tremendous energy to straighten out the military, to straighten out ISIS, to straighten out our horrible trade deals, to terminate Obamacare and come up with something far better for far less money. You need somebody with tremendous personal energy as President.
We have a president right now that doesnt have energy. I mean, you think Obama has energy? He has no energy. And hes been a horrible president.
We need somebody with great personal energy as a leader so that we can make great deals with other countries and do well in every other respect. And certainly Jeb does not have that energy in my opinion.






From the Guardian. Ah, they treat me very nicely in Scotland. Go ahead.






Well, we just went over that. Honestly, we just went over that. And its only going to make it harder.






Youre going to see what were going to do. Youre going to see. But the whole thing with anchor babies, I turned out to be right. A person has a baby, lives in Mexico or lives in Asia or lives in many different place, has a baby, walks across the border, has the baby here. Now, were responsible for that person for the next 85 years. I dont think so.
And by the way, I was right, they were wrong. The 14th Amendment does not give them clearance on that.
And if you wanted to do that in Mexico or if you wanted to do that in almost any other country where you have a baby in that country and that country has that person for 85 years including all of the costs of that person, they would laugh you right out of the country. You would be laughed out of the country so fast.
So, that turned out  I was 100% right. Well have to worry about that. Were going to take care of it, and its going to be done in a very humane way.
But were going to bring back our country and were going to have a wall and Mexicos going to pay for the wall and you know why theyre going to pay? And I have great relationships with Mexico and phenomenal relationships with the Mexican people. Phenomenal. And they buy apartments from me; they work for me by the thousands  by the thousands. Phenomenal relationships.
But let me just tell you we lose so much money with Mexico in terms of trade imbalance  $45 billion last year. Plus, we give Mexico billions and billions of dollars. They will pay for the wall. And it will be very interesting.
And you know what? People are going to come into this country but theyre going to come in legally.




A lot of European countries are going to build walls to stop the immigration.
Well, walls work. All you have to do is ask Israel. Walls work if its properly constructed. Not the walls that these characters, these politicians that we have running our country who are a disgrace  all talk, no action politicians  they build a wall this big, they drive cars right through it.
Walls work. All you have to do is go and see Israel. They will tell you that walls work.






We need pomp and circumstance. Our country has no spirit. Our country has no gravitas. Our country doesnt feel good about itself. And the primary reason is we have no victories. I mean, where have we had a victory? Where have we had a victory in trade? Where have we had a victory as an example this horrible deal that was signed with Iran where weve given them $150 billion and we lose everything. We lose everything. Its a laughing stock. Worst deal. Worst contract Ive ever seen drawn.
We have no victories. And I do write about it. We need some pomp and circumstance. We need spirit. We need a cheerleader.
I thought seven years ago when Obama got elected, the one thing I thought that he would be a great cheerleader for this country. Hes not. Hes been a great divider for the country. Hes been one of the great dividers of all time.
Im not saying dress. It has nothing to do with dress. It has to do with the fact that what he says is very divisive. He has been a great divider for this country, and that should not have happened.






Ill go anyway they want. I dont care too much about the debates. Look, Im the one that gets all the nasty questions anyway. Nobody else gets the really nasty questions. In a certain way, maybe theyre defending me although I will tell you theyre not doing it for that reason.






I think its irrelevant. I just  I like the debates. Ive had the debates. Ive done well in the debates. As you know, every single poll said I won all three debates. Now, I dont know if I did or not but I certainly didnt do badly. But every single poll says  even CNBCs poll said I won the debate.
So I like the debates. I think theyre good for me. But we have to be treated a little bit fairly.
As an example, Hillary Clinton  no tough questions. I mean, why didnt they ask about Bill? Why didnt they ask about all of the different things. No tough questions. Now, that was staged by the Democrats. And frankly, they did a very smart thing in the way they staged it.
Well, were going to stage something properly also.
But as far as Im concerned, I really dont care that much. I just want a debate. I think debating is a good thing. Its healthy. Gets everything into the open.
But you dont want people like Harwood that read a question  blah, blah, blah  that he wrote  that he carefully wrote. He thought he was such  his career  in my opinion, his career is probably ruined or certainly threatened.
He could ask about anything you want. I mean, you have to ask about anything you want. Hillary had only softballs. All night long. It was like this  "Here, Hillary, hit this one out of the park."








Are you from Russia? All right. I think our relationship with Russia will be very good. Vladimir Putin was on 60 Minutes with me three weeks ago. Right? Putin. And they have one of the highest ratings theyve had in a long time. So Im going to give him total credit. But we will have a very good relationship I think with Russia.
Now, maybe we wont. But I believe we will have a very good relationship with Russia. I believe that I will have a very good relationship with Putin.






Sounds okay to me.






Well, I think there are a lot of economic issues. We didnt talk about trade. We didnt talk about devaluations. Right? We didnt talk about corporate inversions, which by the way, none of the other candidates, they dont even know what it means.
But we didnt talk about corporate inversions where companies are leaving our country  massive companies  because they cant get their money back and because they get lower taxes elsewhere. So theyre leaving and theyre taking their jobs with them.
The corporate inversion syndrome is a very important thing to be talking about.
These were all things that werent talked about at the debate. Instead, they talked about fantasy football. I mean, it was a big question  fantasy football. Im saying what about corporate inversions? $2.5 trillion at least. I think its probably twice that number is in other countries wanting to come back and because our system is so corrupt and terrible, they cant get the money back to invest in this country.
So they dont talk about corporate inversions at the debates. They talk about fantasy football. Those are the few.






I was against the war in Iraq. You know, it was very early on. Ill give it to you. Yeah, I have it upstairs
Well, you know, you have to understand, I was a developer. A lot of people didnt care about my view in 2003 and 2004. But there was a Reuters article taken from a magazine about my stance in 2004, I believe, in July of 2004 and it talked about my stance on how I felt about Iraq. And I said very strongly exactly what happened. I said you will destabilize the Middle East and when you destabilize the Middle East, Iran will take over Iraq. Thats exactly whats happening. And they will take over the oil reserves, which are among the largest in the world, and in addition other bad things will happen. The other bad things are ISIS. I said that in 2004 and that was an article that was taken from a magazine which was previous to that. Ive felt that for a long time.






Do I think that its time for some of the other Republicans in the race that registering zero  in a couple of places they have a zero with an arrow pointing left, which I assume is a mistake because thats less than zero. I assume thats not happening. Do I think its time to have some of the other Republican candidates drop out? Yes. There are too many people. Well, I dont want to get personal but you can look at the poll numbers.
Look, if a person is campaigning for four or five months and theyre at 0% or 1% or 2%, they should get out.
Like, you know, look at me. I go to Florida and look at the numbers that just came out in Florida. 37%? Georgia. I mean, those are real numbers. These numbers that these people have  and I often ask myself. I asked Mark yesterday, "What are they doing? Do they do this for their brand? Because I happen to think its very bad for their brand."
I think [Scott] Walker did a good thing. I think the way Walker  he saw it wasnt happening, wasnt going to happen and he just got out quickly. You know, he was favored. Dont forget. You know. That was before Trump was going to happen. Right? But he was favored for a period of time. Favored. Walker. Gov. Walker. They thought he was going to win.
What happened is he got out.
I think the way he got out was great. I think he did a really smart thing for himself.
And frankly, other people should get out because I would like to personally have more time to talk about the problems of the United States and more importantly how we can solve the problems. So its a great question. People should get out.








Ivanka. Oh, they just said one of the biggest applause lines  its true  I get is when I talk about my daughter Ivanka. She was just at Fortune Magazine for like something like Woman of the Year which is greatBut Ivanka is going to be very involved and Melania is going to be very involved very soon. Theyre going to be coming out very soon.






Oh, Ivanka is going to Iowa. When are you going to Iowa? Very soon.






I would say  I dont see threats. I mean, whatever it is I have to do. Mark is saying "What are the top threats to your candidacy?" Who knows? I mean, youre in the crazy world of politics. People change their minds.
Im going to make America great again. Nobody else is going to be able to do that. Im going to do it.
Im going to make it in my opinion better than ever before, and I think thats awfully tough to compete with.
And one of the reasons that in my book I actually put financials in there  I showed some of the developments that  I have many, many more because you can only  Simon and Schuster  you actually kept me to eight or nine pages. Right? And there are four or five in a page. But I show some of the great developments that I have done that are so successful and so incredible and so financially good, I show my financial statement from a year and a half, two years ago. Now its even better but we didnt have that certified yet.
So I do that not in a braggadocious way. I do that because thats the kind of thinking our country needs right now.
We are run by people that are incompetent. We are run by people who in so many words  I hate to use the word stupid but you have to use that word. Unless they have bad intentions which I dont believe they do. But we are run by incompetent people. We have incompetent leadership.
There are so many things. Like I mentioned corporate inversion. The Democrats want the money to come back. Who doesnt? The Republicans want the money to come back. For three years, the Democrats have said we want the money to come back. For three years, the Democrats and the Republicans agree 100%. You have a vast majority. Maybe everybody. For three years. Guess what? They havent done anything. Right? They cant even get along when they agree.
So heres the thing where we can take trillions of dollars, bring it back to this country, rebuild big parts of our country with it, companies can spend that money in our country, we have everybody agrees it should be done for years and they cant do it. Thats a part of the problem.






Well, youre going to look  a lot of controversy with Mr. Singer. A lot of controversy with Mr. Singer. There are those people that probably wouldnt have want him to back. But well see. Ill talk to you.






No, they all agree. They all agree. They just didnt want to go through the unfair questions because they werent questions; they were statements.
You see, they were asking  they were giving statements in a sarcastic, disgusting way.
And by the way, I think Becky is terrific and I think Carl is terrific. But I think John Harwood is not very good at what he does. But I think Becky Quick is a terrific person. I think Carl is a terrific person. But I will tell you John Harwood was a disgrace to CNBC.






The question is should the Fed raise rates? They are not raising them because Obama has asked them not to raise them. In my opinion, he wants to get out of office because we are in a bubble and when those rates are raised, a lot of bad things are going to happen or potentially going to happen. And in my opinion, Janet Yellen is highly political and shes not raising rates for a very specific reason because Obama told her not to because he wants to be out playing golf in a year from now and he wants to be doing other things and he doesnt want to see a big bubble burst during his administration. Janet Yellen should have raised the rates. Shes not doing it because the Obama administration and the president doesnt want her to. And if she does it, you see what happens every time theres even a thought of raising them just a little bit.
And one of the problems that we have is our currency right now is not competitive with other currencies. Because if you look at the devaluations of China, of Japan, of many, many different countries, theyre making it impossible for our companies to compete with them because we dont have leaders that know how to say to China, "Dont do that. Dont do that. Because if you do that, were going to put a big fat tax on you. Dont do that." And you know what? If you said that, they wouldnt do it. If you have the right messenger






Im really focused on one very big election, one very important election, and there are some pretty good elections. Im not watching any of them in particular. Ill be watching them on Tuesday night. But Ill be out there; well be out voting.
But the election that Im watching is the election for the presidency of the United States. That is going to be in my opinion this will be truly one of the most important elections weve ever had in this country. Were so far behind. And we cannot go another four years with incompetent leadership.






Thats a good question. Okay. So, Simon and Schuster came up to me. They wanted to do a book. They wanted to do on success and how do you do this and how do you build it and thats what the book is largely about but we talked so much about the country. And I said, "Ill do it but we have to talk about the country."
What happened is they sent this incredible photographer up to do a book cover, do to a picture. And he did some greatphotos. Im smiling. Im happy. I look good. Everything was fine. And then he took one where I wasnt like really thinking about a photo and then it turned out to be a nasty picture. And then the book was written and the title was given and the only really terrible picture I had was that one. Its a terrible, horrible, nasty picture. But when youre talking about "Crippled America" and youre talking about all of the problems we have, I cant have a big smiley face up there. So thats how we picked it. We picked the worst photo taken of me.
I would have loved to have a beautiful smiling picture but somehow that doesnt go with the title of the book or frankly the content of the book, and actually Simon and Schuster agreed with me. Okay?






Are the other Republicans afraid to debate? Well, some of them should be.
Thank you very much everybody. Thank you.


I was telling some of the folks backstage, I never ever thought wed do this well this fast. This has been so incredible. Whats happened all over. Whats happened in Iowa. Its been really incredible.
Weve had some amazing results and they continue to come in.
Got a little shake-up in Iowa. I dont know whats going on.
Somebody said "Are you going straight to New Hampshire?" Now, I love New Hampshire. Weve got great numbers. 38 to 12. Thats good.
But we fell a little behind in Iowa, and some people are saying how can it be. And I come out and I was just telling a group we have the biggest crowds, we have the most enthusiastic crowds.
Everybody said and its very true. I mean, look at this. Somebody else would come, theyd have like 50 people and they wouldnt need this room. Believe me.
But everybody said without question in every poll  this isnt just here  that the people that are with Trump are with Trump. They dont go anywhere. Theyre staying. Its true. I see it. I see it.
And weve seen it.
You know, a couple of times I say "Well, that could be the end." Then they do something and Im 10 points up. Its the craziest thing, right? But well take it.
But they say the people are with  we have the most loyal people by far. Everybody says it.
The other thing they say is for leadership, number one. Very important, right? Dont you think? Leadership.
I mean, when leadership is number one  they say on the economy without question number one and by a lot.
So you know its great.
I thought Id talk a little bit and I want to take some questions. You know, we can do a little question and answer. Right?
We have all these cameras going back here. And you know, its always tough when youre on live television all the time.
Look, we have 10 topics. Right? How many topics? 10? How many different ways can you talk about the 10 topics?
The bottom line is we want results. We want to get it done. But when youre on live television all the time all those people back there and the cameras are on and then youre talking about immigration and youre talking about the wall because were going to have a wall and were going to stop illegal immigration.
But we talk about trade and we talk about repealing Obamacare. And we talk about all the things that we talk about.
But you know, you have these points and we could talk about them in different forms, in different ways and give different examples. But in the end, its really about results. Isnt it? Its really about results.
And you can only talk about the same subjects on live television so many different ways.
I talk about industry. I talk about commerce. I talk about how were losing our jobs to all of these different countries. And I give different examples.
But its still going to be a certain number of subjects.
I talk about Second Amendment. I talk about Fourteenth Amendment. We talk about amendments.
You know, that Second Amendment, they want to take it away from you. They really want to do things and its not going to happen. Its not going to happen. At least with me its not going to happen. That I can tell you.
So I said today you know well talk for a little while but I want to do some questions and answers. I want you people to excite me for a change. Is that okay? I want to be excited. And so were going to have some fun. Were going to do that.
A few things  I want to bring up a few new subjects.
So, immigration, were going to be doing a very strong number. Its killing us. Its killing us. And its bad for the economy. Its bad for  all of this illegal immigration.


And I have to tell you legal  you come in and were going to have a good time and youre going to be there and youre going to do great  and visas  maybe work, maybe there are cases where you need people in and well do something, were not going to hurt our economy in any way, shape or form. Were going to make our economy much, much stronger.
But were also going to get jobs for people that are here. People with us. Were going to get jobs. Were going to get jobs.
But the illegal immigration  you know, I did this and I made my determination  I took a deep breath. Because Ill tell you what, it takes courage to say Im going to run for president. It really does, especially in my case where I have a great business and I love my business. I love doing it. I may never even see it.
I mean, I own some of the great properties in the world. Doral in Miami. I may never see it again Turnberry in Scotland, one of the greatest homes of the British Open and all of that. I may never see it again.
All of these incredible places that I have.
But more than that, it takes courage because when you do it, youre putting yourself out there beyond anything that anybodys done and it even takes courage for a politician to do it.
Now at some point some of these guys have to leave. Dont we agree? Its getting ridiculous.
Because like tomorrow night were having a debate, and I wish we had more time for the debate. Not in terms of three hours because who wants three hours? You know, I could stand up for 20 hours if I had to but who wants to watch that long?
Hillarys debate essentially lasted for an hour and a half and I was  oh  it was  you couldnt watch it.
You have Hillary against a socialist/communist. And honestly, hes not going to win. Just so you understandHes not going to win and neither is she
Well, shes being totally protected because in theory she shouldnt even be allowed to run. Shes being protected.
Its a tough game and its a nasty game but shes being totally protected.
But shes going to beat him and you still have one more of these guys. OMalley. So hell be out quickly, I guess. I dont know whats he doing. What do they do when they have zero? They have zero.
And I wouldnt say it against our folks. But theyve treated me  some of the zeroes have treated me so nastily, right? Because they want to start controversy and they want to try pick up some points.
And you know what? Im not going to even mention names. Usually I do. I love doing it. But everybody thats hit me so far has gone down. Theyve gone down. And theyve gone down bigly.
And a couple of the ones and zeroes  theyre the ones that hit the hardest. I mean, theyre like desperate people. But they hit.
One of them has a zero with an arrow pointing to the left. That means less than zero. And I dont understand. What does it mean? I assume its a typo but maybe not.
But when you look at the things that are happening with our country  the trade situation with not just China  I talk about China all the time because thats the main abuser, thats the biggest abuser. The numbers are astronomical. Almost $400 billion a year in terms of imbalance. Think of it  $400 billion a year.
And they send stuff over here but we cant send stuff over there. They tax us. Big tax.
A friend of mine cant get stuff over there. The tax is so big. Big tax.
Somebody bought an airplane in China here. Cant get it over there. Spoiled guy. Rich guy. Bought a beautiful plane. Cant get it over there because the tax is so massive that hes now selling in this country because China wont let him have the plane and he has to pay a tax.
I wont even tell you what the tax is. Its so astronomical that I dont even believe them myself. So Im not going to say it because those guys will say "Well, he was wrong." All I can tell you is its a massive tax. Like you dont buy planes here because if you do, you wont be able to get them back in.
And here, we accept all of their products.
So we have almost a $400 billion trade imbalance with China.
We have a $70 billion trade imbalance with Japan.
We have a  you know, with all thats going on in the South China Sea and you look where we have a destroyer  a relatively small ship  over there, I dont know if Id want to be the captain of that ship right now. But theyre being sort of mocked and scorned and a lot of bad things can happen.


But you know, we have an agreement with Japan and I love Japan. I love China. I love all these people. But their leaders are killing us because theyre smarter, sharper, more cunning.
The leaders of Mexico are killing us at the border and in trade. Theyre taking so many of our companies.
Even Nabisco  my Oreos  theyre taking Nabisco. Right? Im never eating Oreos. I tell it all the time. They had some Oreos before on the plane and I said I dont want to touch them. Bring them back. I yelled out to bring them back.
But Im not happy. Theyre leaving Chicago and theyre moving their big plant to Mexico.
So when you see this happening, we have to stop it.
And Im not going to beat around the bush and "Oh, lets talk and lets be nice and lets say  " Nobody can do it like I do it. Nobody. Honestly, nobody.
We can  Im not saying Im perfect because Im not perfect. Nobodys perfect
Now, nobodys perfect. But Ill tell you when it comes to that stuff Im really  theres nobody better.
Carl Icahn endorsed me the other day. Hes one of the great traders, one of the great dealmakers. He says Trump, Trump. And hes not somebody that just do it. He wants somebody that knows what theyre doing. He understand.
You talk about corporate inversions and all of the things that have been going on.
Corporate inversions. You know, many of the companies in this country have trillions of dollars cumulatively. They think $2.5 trillion overseas right now. They cant get it in.
And everybody agrees that we should bring it in. The Democrats and the Republicans. Theyve agreed for years. They cant make a deal because they have no leader.
Its not like "Oh gee, we disagree on Obamacare. Or we disagree on something else."
Although I must tell you many of the Democrats that I speak to because Im friendly with all of them. Im friendly with like Republicans. I get a long with everybody.
You know, everybody says "Oh, you wont be a unifier". Ill be the greatest unifier of all. Why is Obama a unifier?
But I will tell you many of the Democrats who voted for Obamacare would never have done it now and were lied to 28 times. Right? "You can keep your doctor, keep your plan, keep your this, everythings going to be great." Turned out to be a total lie. 28 different times that they know of and they wouldnt have done it.
But when you look at whats happening with corporations and the highest tax  we pay the highest tax anywhere in the world of any country  but they have trillions of dollars overseas. And these are great companies in many cases. They have thousands of employees. They cant get their money back.
And the reason is bureaucracy. Its very hard.
And also big reason the tax is too high. They dont want to bring $1 million back and pay $300,000 or $350,000 tax. Theyd rather leave it over there.
And if they bring it back, theyll be using it to invest in our country. I mean, a lot of good things will happen.
I happen to believe its more than $2.5 trillion.
But heres the thing and I use it because its so incredible. Heres the thing. Its not controversial. Its not like you have the Republicans here and you have  everybody agrees. Theyve agreed you know that for 2.5, 3 years. They cant make a deal.
And now whats happening and this will be the next great story is companies are leaving the United States  two reasons  lower taxes but also to get their money. Theyve got billions of dollars overseas. Theyre leaving our country in order to get their money and in order to pay lower tax.
And youre talking about one company I know of  I dont know how much theyve written about it  but youre talking about 6,000 jobs just one company. Youre talking about potentially thousands of companies.
And I say it, in the old days, theyd leave New York. People would move down and companies would move down to Florida or theyd move to Texas or theyd leave New Jersey, where taxes are quite high, and theyd move to another location. Right? Now, they leave our country and they go to other countries. Thats whats happened.
In the world of the Internet and the world of very fast jets, its a different world out there.
And theres no loyalty. Theyre paid a lot of money to make a lot of money for their shareholders and some of them are actually foreign; theyd like to move back to these countries.
They bring in executives that are from Ireland, from other places. And they dont mind. They dont have loyalty to the United States.
So my plan, my tax plan, is something Im very proud of. Were going to solve corporate inversion.
Ill tell you what, we will have that money back  if I get elected president, that money will be back so fast your head will spin. Nobody else will be able to do it. Nobody.


Honestly, nobody else even knows about it. The other candidates, most of them dont even know about it. Its not their wheelhouse. Okay? Its not their thing. Its not their thing.
Their thing is getting re-elected. Thats what theyre good at. They get re-elected. And they make promises and theyre all talk and theyre no action. And the same things happen with these politicians. Its always the same.
So we have so many different things and what Ive done with our tax plan, which something Im very proud of, weve brought it down to a few groups.
Because right now, you have to go out  people who arent doing well go out and hire companies to help them with their tax plans. Theyll pay $500, $1,000 because its so complicated.
And were going to make it nice and simple.
And were getting rid of carried interest, which is something that a lot of rich hedge fund guys love. But were getting rid of it. They dont love me so much anymore. But I dont care.
And were getting rid of a lot of things.
So were going to have a nice simple tax return.
Somebody said "Oh, why isnt everybody paying?"
You know, 40%  a big percentage  will not pay any tax at all. People that are doing badly.
They said  well, I wont use the candidates name because I dont want to insult any candidate when they cant defend themselves. They said "We want everybody to pay at least something." And I said, "I agree."
Heres the problem. From the standpoint of bookkeeping, from the standpoint of bureaucracy, youre talking about millions and millions of returns. Youre talking about building the IRS even bigger and its a monster. And I could cut it down way down. And the money that youre talking about is far less than the administrative costs.
So I said, "I agree. Except for one thing from a practical standpoint, its too much. Most of these people arent paying anyway."
What I want to do is bring our jobs back from China, bring our jobs back from Mexico, bring fairness to our deals as an example with Japan.
I was in Los Angeles. Ships  the biggest ships youve ever seen. Cars are pouring off into this country. Made in Japan. We give them practically nothing.
The balance is so bad. The imbalance is so bad. And then we have all the strikes.
See, what our people dont know and only somebody that wrote "The Art of the Deal" or does this stuff. Its natural. Its like a great athlete. Like a Jack Nicklaus. He was always able to sink that putt. Right? You know, hes just better. And you have athletes  very few  but there are some people that have a certain ability.
A lot of people dont even know we have all the power. We have all the power in China.
You know, we owe right now China and Japan equally $1.5  think of this  trillion. $1.5 trillion. Think of this. They take our business and in the case of Japan, mostly cars. But they take our business. They take our jobs. Factories close down all over the place. And we owe them money. Right? Its a magic act. For them not for us. For us its a horror show.
Its going to end. Its going to end.
And people like Carl Icahn and the people like the best negotiators  I know the best negotiators in the world. Some I think are horrible people. Ill be honest with you. I dont care. Do you care if theyre horrible people? Who cares?
Now, Carl happens to be actually a very nice guy but hes a brilliant negotiator and a tough cookie and hes built a fortune. He doesnt want money. He doesnt want to say, "Oh, give me $200,000 a year in government money." He wants to do it. Hes proud to do it. He wants to help the country. And its so easy for him.
For instance, if I say "Carl, do me a favor. The trade deal we have with China is so unfair were losing $400 billion a year. Carl, do me a favor. Make it fair." I dont have to give him a big speech. I dont have to give him a big speech.
I mean, I can tell you that within a very, very short period of time, things will straighten out. I mean, things will straighten out and its going to be our benefit.
But think of it, if were losing that kind of money  that imbalance. Its an imbalance. Some people will say "Thats not really a loss." It is a loss. If we have that kind of imbalance and suppose you brought it back to zero or even if we lost $100 billion a year, thats a lot of money. Believe me, I couldnt sleep.


If I brought it to $100 billion a year, get rid of me in four years, all right?
But suppose we brought it back to $100 billion or we brought it back to zero, do you know what that means to this country? Do you know the kind of money youre talking about? Then jobs will start coming back, lots of good things would happen. Lots of great things would happen.
And maybe our babies who have all these toys all over the place, maybe theyll have 75% and maybe theyll like them better. Maybe theyll be better. And theyll be manufactured here.
Whenever I order television sets, I ordered thousands and thousands of television sets a year for different jobs. And whenever I order them, they all come from South Korea. They make all the television  other than Sony but Sony has sort of lost its way a little bit. Sony is Japan.
But South Korea  LG, Samsung. I dont get bids from American. Id love to. Id love to.
George Will said theres a company in South Carolina that makes television. I said where are they? Id like to have a good name too by the way. Its important. You know, when somebodys paying you a fortune for a hotel room, its nice to see a good name. Right? Do we agree?
Well, its a company in South Carolina but they dont make them there; they assemble them. Theyll order parts that come in and theyll assemble them. But much different.
But Id love it if we made them.
But you take South Korea. We defend South Korea for essentially nothing. You have the maniac over in North Korea that nobody ever talks about by the way. Now, he really has nuclear weapons and we dont talk about him.
We made the worst deal ever made with Iran. Right? The worst.
These are the people that represent  these people are incompetent. Or stupid. Somebody said, "You shouldnt say stupid. Its not nice." But its true. Theyre stupid. I think. I mean, I think. Unless I dont know is there something going on that we dont know about?
Think of it. Point after point, we lost. We lost everything. Weve given them $150 billion. Hard to believe. They dont have to develop  I was telling somebody they dont have to develop nuclear weapon; they can buy it.
What the hell why should they develop it? They can buy it. And now all of a sudden theyre going into Syria. They got so much money. Theyre a terrorist state. Theyre going into all of these different places. Were fighting them in Yemen and yet were making a deal with them.
So why dont you say "Hey, Yemen out"? Our prisoners  I want them back. I want them back. I dont want them over there. I want them back.
And all we have to do, very simple, is if you have the right messenger. Im the right messenger. You know, Ive gotten to a point where I have to be braggadocious. Its terrible. Right? Because I cant be so nice and say "We can all do a wonderful job". People cant do those kind of stuff.
For instance, the wall. I said, I guarantee you that were going to build a wall. Its going to be a real wall. Were going to have people come through and theyre going to come through legally. Or theyre going to come through with visas, which is a safe way, if we need it.
And we want people to come through. I want people to come through. I dont want to say no.
But we have at least 11 million  you know, the scary thing is nobody has any idea how many. You know, weve been hearing that number for years. You know, like 11 million. We have no idea. I spoke to one of the top people. They have no idea. Might be 5 million. Might also be 32 million. Could be 50 [million]
But we have to get them out. We have to  look, its harsh.
Dwight Eisenhower  we all like Dwight. Right? Remember the expression. Right?
I go remember he got elected  "I like Ike". How could he be bad? All right? And I think he was a nicer general than MacArthur and Patton. And I like Ike as a president but I love Patton and I love General MacArthur. I love them. And were going to find ourselves a Patton and were going to find ourselves because we have a lot of smart guys in our military and women. Were going to find ourselves a PattonBut were going to find a Patton and were going to find a MacArthur. And Im really good at that. Were going to find great people.
And Ive told this story where I watched these generals go on television  they shouldnt be on television. They shouldnt be talking. You know? They shouldnt be talking. They should be doing.


And they asked a certain general, Im not going to insult him. It was like a month and a half ago. On a show. A talk show. I said heres general so and so, one of the top, top, top people. I said whats he doing on television? And hes saying "Well, ISIS is very tough. You know, they spread out."
By the way, they took the oil that I said take. Remember I said "Take the oil"? Always take the oil! Theyre being funded by the oil that I said take.
I dont want their damned oil. But you know what? It turned out to be another benefit of having it. Take the oil. And we didnt do it.
We shouldnt have been in Iraq in the first place. And I said that in 2003. Shouldnt have been there.
We totally destabilized the Middle East. We totally blew it.
But we were there. Then Obama announces because hes so predictable "We are leaving on a certain date in a year."
Right? I couldnt believe. I was sitting there thinking "Did he really say that?"
He said "We will have all troops out by a certain date." Right? Did he say that?
I said "No, no, tell me please."
Oh, you know what another one I got high marks on from every poll? Military. They think Ill be the best in the military because they say I  you know, I always say Ill be the greatest jobs president that God ever created. I will. But everybody knows that, especially God. Everybody knows that.
But you know what Ill be? Ill be the great at the military. Ill be so good. And Ill know when  and Ill build our military so strong, so tough, so incredible, nobodys going to mess around. Were never going to have to use it. Were never going to have to use it.
And Im going to take care of our vets. Believe me, theyre our greatest people and our vets are not being treated as well as illegal immigrants. Im going to take care of our vets.
So go back. So the world is unpredictable.
I made a business deal a year ago. And the guy  oh, I beat him so badly. Aye, it was so beautiful. It was a beautiful thing. It was like a picture. For me, it was like a picture. Thats my own problem. I guess. But to me its like a painting when you could do something like that.
So I made this deal and it was great. And they called. They did a story on me recently and it was a nice story. And I said, I hope they dont call this guy. They ended up calling this guy "What do you think about Trump?" And he said but in a respectful way, he said "He won because he was so damn unpredictable. We dont know what the hell he was going to do." Thats a positive. Thats a positive.
I mean, if youre a poker player and youre predictable, youre not going home with much money. Okay?
But it was really  I said, "Thats not nice what he said." First, I said "Thats not nice. Im unpredictable." Then I said, "Wait a minute. He meant that as a compliment." And I called him. I said, "What did you mean by that?" He said "I think thats the greatest compliment I can pay. We could not figure you out. You came at us from 15 different angles."
So with Obama, when he announces that were leaving Iraq on a certain date, we shouldnt have been there but once you announced the bad guys  you know how they say the surge worked? You know why the surge worked? You know why? Because the bad guys all moved back. They said, "Hey, what do we have to get killed for?" I mean, these people dont mind being killed, can you believe it? But they said "If we dont have to, lets not." So they moved back.
And they said, "Hey, theyre leaving in -" What was the date? Do you remember the date? Specific date to the day. "We will have all troops out. Im a great president."
So the bad guys, meaning the opponents, whatever you want to call them, they just said, "Oh, youre leaving in a year. Going to have all the troops out. Lets go back. Why do we have to be shot at for the next year? And what do we have to do because if we do well maybe hell change his mind and stay. So lets let him think he has this great victory with the surge." Right? "The surge worked!"
What happened was that everybody pulled back. They said, "Lets wait."
Now we leave because of a lack of leadership. We leave and boom it comes apart. Thats what happened. That was the surge.
Everybody talk so much  "Oh, the surge was so great." The surge was great because everybody knew  they knew what was happening. They knew it was going to happen. They knew we were leaving even through Bush.
I mean, honestly, they knew we were leaving. They were fed up. So they pulled back and they said, "Lets get them out." Everybody wanted to leave.
Now, I would have done it differently. Even if I wanted to leave and I might or I might not. I wont even say.




People say, "Mr. Trump, whats your attitude on ISIS? When will you attack them? Where?
I say "You know, I dont want to talk  I have a real chance of winning. I dont want to tell you what my attitude. I want them to guess. I dont really want to tell you."
I mean, the one bad thing about our system, we have a system that got flaws. Lets face it. Hey, look at our leadership, its got flaws.
But you know the one bad thing? When I gave that answer, they say  although some people  I see it here  some people say "We love that. We love that." But when I give that answer, some people say "Oh, Trump doesnt know. He doesnt know. He didnt give an answer as to exactly what hes going to do. Exactly what hes going to do."
And I know exactly what Im going to do and eventually after I was asked the question by 10 different reporters, all of whom are here tonight by the way, I said, "You know, heres the problem. If I dont give the answer, Im not going to win because they write so incredibly negatively. So if I dont give the answer, Im not going to win." Theyre going to say "Trump wouldnt give us the answer."
They dont know its unpredictability. They dont know its strategy.
And I said for a period of time like a month, I said "I dont want to tell you because I actually have a chance because from the time I announced, Ive been on the top of the polls, almost at the top. You know, were doing well."
Iowa, will you get your numbers up please? Would you get these numbers up? I promise you I would do such a good job.
First of all, I am a great Christian and I am. I am. Remember that.
And I do well with the evangelicals. But the evangelicals left me down a little bit just last month. I dont know what I did.
But I am a great Christian. Im a believer and I believe in the Bible. And I even brought my Bible a month ago to a group signed by my mother, Mary, and with the address and the date  I wont tell you what date it was because possibly youd think Im younger than that. But she didnt want anybody taking my Bible because that was very important to her.
So cute. She has the address, has the date. But I said to myself, "You know  "
By the way, before I forget, will you get the numbers up Iowa please? This is ridiculous. I mean, what is my competition? In all fairness, in all fairness, what is my competition?
Do you think these guys  Im not going to say Carson  Im not going to say Rubio, who really is way down  I mean, I am second. Its not like its terrible. But I dont like being second. Second is terrible to me.
But do you think that Ben is going to go to China? These guys are fierce. Like theyd come into your office. Ive made many deals with China. Ive had great victories in terms of deals with China. They come into your office. Theres no "Hello. How are you? Its a wonderful day." They come in  "We want deal." Theres no games. I do this for a living. Im really good at it, folks. Really good.
And you know, when you talk about energy, Ill tell you one thing, everybody agrees  oh, do I have energy. Oh. I toss and turn thinking about how Im going to make the best deal for you folks. Ill be tossing and turning. I will be tossing and turning. Youre going to have so many deals that is so good for you. Were going to have numbers are going to be so good.
I always joke you may get tired of them but then I always take that back because nobody gets tired of winning.
We dont win anymore. You know, think about it. Do we win at all? Ever?
We lose with the military. ISIS beats us. Everybody.
We lose with trade.
When are we going to come back and say, "We beat China" on a deal? When are we going to come back, "We beat Japan"?
Do you know that everybody said "Oh, Japan. They have so power over us. They have so much power because we owe them $1.5 trillion and they send all those cars."
They have no power. If we ever say, "Listen, if youre not going to treat us fairly, we dont want your cars anymore", theyd go out of business, folks, theyre gone.
Same thing with China. China is not even doing that well. But they just lowered, they just devalued their currency. The biggest in two decades. And the reason they did it, they could never thought but we have so many other problems that they felt, "Oh wow, we can get away with this and its going to make it impossible."
Did you see the results yesterday of Caterpillar Tractor? Horrible. Because theyre not getting stuff out because everybody  Japan and China in particular  is devaluing their currency. Thats their number one weapon. And the stupid trade deal that were making doesnt even cover it. Thats their number one weapon and the trade that were making doesnt cover it.


So I only say this and you know what? People might say "Its terrible. Hes a terrible person, a terrible human being. But Im going to vote for him anyways." Okay, thats fine. Im actually a nice person.
I always say this  nobody can do this stuff better than me. And I know all the guys Im running against. Theyre wonderful people. Some of them I really like. But who cares?
I was talking to one of the candidates the other day. I was talking about corporate inversions and they didnt even know what the hell I was talking. They had no idea. Its not their thing.
And unless we stop all of the things that are going with other countries and unless we make great trade deals, were being eaten alive.
Thats why when you look at the phony numbers, we have 100 million people in our workforce that arent working. Our real unemployment rate is probably 30%. Its not 5.3%. That was done for politicians so theyd look good. Its not 5.3%. How can you have 5.3% when you have 100 million people?
You look for a job. If youre a young guy, that handsome young guy with the red hair, right therebut if he comes out and he goes into the workforce and he looks for a job and he goes through college and does well and then he cant get a job and when he gives up because at some point after months you give up, they essentially consider you employed. Its the most ridiculous thing.
We have a tremendous  tens of millions of people in that position. They cant find jobs. Theyre good people. They want to work. They cant. But its not reflected in the real numbers because the politicians want to look good.
So let me just before we talk some questions, Im going to talk about something Ive never really talked about it onstage but we should talk about it. Its called Super PACs.
Its one of the great scams of all time. Its one of the great scams.
So we sent out  I think I had  and its not me. People set them up. And I dont know. Maybe theyre setting up for my benefit.
Lets take me. A guy sees me, likes me, sets up a Super PAC. I dont talk to him. I dont do anything.
I think we had either 9 or 5 or 11. We dont even know. Theyre all over the place. Trump, Trump  one of them called The Art of the Deal PAC after the book.
They have all these PACs. And the money comes in. And what do they do with the money? I dont know.
And we arent supposed to call them or anything. Okay.
So, we wrote a letter  a legal letter  to I think either 9 or 11 last week saying we dont want their money, send it back because again, what do they do with it? If some guy thats having a hard time all of a sudden has $2 million sitting in a Super PAC, do you think hes going to take ads for Trump? Maybe and maybe not.
So we sent them a  its a scam, Super PACs, a scam. Its a disgrace that we have. A disgrace.
And Ill tell you I read a number with, as an example, with Ben. Ben is paying 70 to almost 80 cents on the dollar to raise money. So when you read he has all this money, hes paying a lot of money and thats not reflected yet. So when you hear they raised $20 million, theyre paying  now think of it, who pays  the number I actually heard was 79 but you know these guys will check them so Im telling you it may be off but you all know its a lot.
I think they said, 79 cents on the dollar. Think of it. To raise the money, they take 79 cents before they get to use the money for what it was supposed to be. Somebody is making a fortune.
I know in Romneys campaign, a couple of guys walked away with millions and millions of dollars. Millions. They became rich raising money. Its better than being a real estate broker.
For the people and real estate brokers, they take these massive percentages of the money they raise. Its a scam. Its a scam.
Now, in Bens case, his Super PAC is running Iowa. And let me tell you, the people that are running that Super PAC, even if it comes in small donations, those are the real bosses. Those are the bosses.
In the case of Jeb Bush, youre not supposed to deal with these Super PACs. Okay? So, it was in the Wall Street Journal the other day. He has a Super PAC fundraiser or something in a hotel and right next to it, he had his campaign ballroom. Did you read that? Two ballrooms. One here, one here, right next to each other by coincidence, of course. Theyre not supposed to be coordination. Theyre not supposed to be talking. Theyre right next to each other. And thats nothing compared to what some are doing.
Its a scam and it should be stopped. And its unfair to somebody like me that is spending my own money.


And what happened and I havent talked about this before but Im seeing whats going on. Its horrible whats going on. What happened is the last time they had the Super PACs, I actually think there was sort of a wall. You know, they called it the wall.
And this is a wall too. Wont be as good as the one Im going to build but its a wall.
But it was a wall and they didnt deal.
I mean, even though like Bush has a friend of his running his Super PAC, Im sure they never talk. Im sure. What do you think the chances are that they talk? 100% or 99%? 100%. Id say 100%. Id say 100%. Only a foolish person would say 99%. But whatever.
Theyre not supposed to. But they put a friend in there. They put other people in there. They put whoever. And thats the way it works.
And in some cases, I hear in Bens case, I hear in other cases, theyre literally running.
I mean, had Walker done this in all fairness because he had money in the Super PAC but he had no money in his campaign and he was unable to figure out this is what theyre all doing. Thats why hes out of the race because he couldnt figure it out.
The whole thing with Super PACs is a horrible, horrible scam. So I sent letters last week to as many as we could find. Theyre all over the place. We want you to close the Super PAC. We want nothing to do with it. We dont want to get advertisements. We dont want any of the money. Go home and ideally give the money back. They dont even have to give the money back from what I understand. They can keep it. Theyll probably if they actually raised money for me, theyll say "What a horrible thing he just said. I think were going to support somebody else." They could do that.
But the Super PACs have total control over the people running for office. Total. Nothing over me. Nothing.
I feel its very unfair. I feel its a very unfair situation.
Now, if they want, they could have full disclosure and everythingBut what are they doing with this whole thing?
And I think it makes dishonest people out of people that might be honest.
But the Super PACs are controlling your candidates  some more than others. Some are unbelievable.
And what the press should really do is take a look at how much money is left. When you read that Ben raised $1, how much is left after he pays all of the consultants and all of these people, how much is left to spend in the campaign. Youll be amazed. I mean, its so little.
Bush, its the same thing.
And Ill go over  there are other names. I know every one of them. But its a horrible thing thats taking place.
And again, last cycle, at least they went through the motions. Now, theyre not even going through the motions. Theyre not even going through.
And just remember when I have to negotiate with companies to keep them in this country so they build jobs here and they build their plants here and their factories here and they do all of the things here, when I have to do that, you know, John Deere, I paid them tens of millions of dollars. You can even check. I said to John Deere, "I want an endorsement." I dont know if theyll give me an endorsement. Ill tell you if they dont theyre not so smart. I guarantee no other person gave John Deere  I mean, I bought probably more than $10 million worth of John Deere equipments. I love it. You know why? Iowa. Iowa. I love it. I love it.
When we can. By the way, its a great company. Its a great company. But I buy a lot of stuff from John Deere because I have a lot of big developments that really require John Deere type equipment. I dont have to buy it from them. I could buy it from others. But I want to steer it to them when I can.
But we have to do something to clean up this political mess because its crooked stuff. Its crooked stuff. And its got to stop.
And its very unfair to people who go out and do it the way youre supposed to do it, including me. I think Im the only one thats self-funding. Im the only one putting up my own money, other than  I know its precious  people write in to DonaldJTrump.com or whatever and they send me checks like $20. I keep saying the woman for $7.50, $50, $100. I dont want their money. But if you send it back its totally insulting.
I mean, they always write letters too. They write these beautiful letters  "Mr. Trump, I cant afford much and I know you dont need it but Im sending $50 because thats so important what youre saying about the country." Its beautiful.
I mean, Ive seen such beautiful letters. And if I send it back, theres no letter I can write thats not going to be insulting to those people, really. "Dear Mr. So and So or Mrs. So and So, I dont need your money and thanks a lot but were going to do it ourselves." If I got that back, Id say "Who the hell does he think he is?"


So we take that and its something that I think is important.
So I always preface it by saying I dont consider that funding but Im self-funding my campaign and Im getting ready to put up millions, millions.
And something Im very proud of that I think its great and its you know really great, it hasnt gotten very much publicity, hasnt gotten much publicity, but I have spent less money than any other candidate. Okay? By far. I think. I dont know, probably a couple of guys that have nothing so they just go aroundBut I was told that I spend less. And I have the best results because in most polls Im number one.
Now, until Iowa came along, I said "every poll", and then Iowa  what the hell are you people doing to me? You know? You know?
Im telling you. They said, "Why dont you skip Iowa?" They told me that. Everybody said "Skip Iowa". All of the political geniuses.
A man just interviewed me back there, great reporter. Hes actually a great reporter. Of course, if he writes a bad story, I wont say that. But he is. Hes a great reporter.
And he said, "Would you ever think of maybe skipping Iowa going right to New Hampshire? And then youd go to South Carolina" where Im leading by massive  yeah, youve got to see the rallies there. Theyre incredible.
"But youd go to New Hampshire. Youd go to South Carolina. You go to Nevada. You go to the SCC."
I said I cant do that because I have such an unbelievable relationship with the people from Iowa that I think were going to win. I really do. I believe it. I believe it.
And I dont want to skip Iowa. I think were going to do well. I think were going to do great with evangelicals. I think a lot of things are going to come out over the next period of time that are not going to be so good for our opponents, honestly, and I think Im going to do great with the evangelicals because I am the real deal. I will tell you that. Im the real deal.
So I told these political pros, you know, I hate to say it but the last long number of elections on the Republican circuit, the person that won Iowa did not get the nomination. Okay? I want to take away some of your muster. You understand that.
So could we do  and please do me a favor? Let me win Iowa. And then Im going to win, Im telling you were going to win New Hampshire, and were going to win South Carolina.
A great poll just came out on North Carolina just a little while. A PPP poll. It was great. Some of you saw that. But great poll.
But were going to go on and were going to win. Were going to win.
And actually, one of the pundits  because you have some smart pundits and some very, very dumb pundits. A lot of pundits said "Hell never run. Hes not going to run." Theyre still trying to recover.
But one of the very smart one says "If Trump wins Iowa, its over." Its interesting because it will go right through because everywhere else is so great.
And I thought it was good here. Come on. Okay, so thats the end of that.
But I want to tell you, will you  I refuse to say "Get your asses in gear." I will not say that. I will not say it. I will not say it because I dont want to use anything thats even a little bit off.
So will you please do me a favor and work with my people and go out on Feb. 1stand vote and give us a victory?
And if I win Iowa, were going to run the whole table and we are going to make such great deals and were going to have such a great military and were going to take care of our health care without that crazy Obamacare thats a nightmare.
So, Im sticking with you people. Im going to spend money here. I have a great team over here. And I will tell you Im going to spend a lot of time here and I really want to win Iowa and I think we should and its so important. And you know, its about time that Iowa could have a victory and let that person go onto a total victory. Okay? Not like over the last  right?
So, I love you all. I mean, were having fun. But I love you all. But I do mean it. Im going to stay here. Were going to work really hard.
When I heard the poll today, they said "What are you going to do?" I said, "Im going to work harder in Iowa." Im not leaving Iowa. Im not leaving Iowa.
Now, if I lose Iowa, I will never speak to you people again. That I can tell you.
Okay, lets do a couple of questions. Right? Come on.


You know, we have now and the numbers they just came out we have 50 million people in poverty in this country.
Now, you look like youre doing pretty well in all fairness. But still, we have 50 million. We have 46 million people and theyre getting food stamps. 46 million. Think of it. You know, we talk about how well were doing.
So we have 50 million  almost 50 million each between poverty, food stamps, and its got to end.
One of the problems  we dont have enough jobs in this country. Its very simple. You know, its so simple when you think about it.
Our jobs have been taken away.
And Ill tell you what else, middle income folks  their salaries havent gone up in 12 years. People are making less wages now than they were 12 years ago. And other things have gone up. So theyre really doing much worse than they were doing 12 years ago.
But thats an amazing stat.
But people  one of the reasons they say Im doing so well because I let people know were going to bring jobs back. Were going to bring industry and plants. Were going to bring it all back and nobody else can say that. Were going to bring it back because a lot of the folks in this room are doing worse than they were 12 years ago and theyre working.
Then the other thing, you have a lot of part-time jobs. I have some people that I know very well and theyve had a job for 20 years at the same place. All of a sudden theyre working part-time because of Obamacare because from an accounting standpoint, it just works better. They love the owners, the stores and things. They love the owners; they think the owners are great. But the owners are forced to make part-time jobs; they have part-time jobs. They work all their life. They have a wonderful company that theyre working for, and now all of a sudden theyre cut into part-time jobs because of Obamacare because of the rulings of Obamacare. And you all know what Im talking about.
So they end up being part-time workers and they dont want to be part-time workers. They dont even like the psychology of being called a part-time worker. And were not going to have that stuff anymore. Were not going to have it any more.
Were going to have real jobs and the numbers are going to go up. Believe me. The numbers are right now worse than 12 years ago and thats a shame


Tell you what, as President, I can guarantee it. As Trump, I can say Ill probably be able to pull it off anyway because they know it wont stop. Itll be easier to take Todd and just say, "Look, were going to work with you, Todd. Okay?" So will you get me that number and everything and well make sure that everything get  and somebody else  who else over here? You have problems with the VA also, huh? Terrible?
I hear only  I just hear terrible. And were going to solve that problem. You know, it can be solved.
The waits now for the VA are longer than theyve ever beenThe waits now are worse than theyve ever been. Thousands of people dying waiting for a doctor. Okay, dying.
And you find the same thing, you say. You have to use your own because they wont do anything.
So were going to take care of our vets and were going to take care of the VA and its going to be one of the things were going to be releasing pretty soon.
But one of the things were going to do with the VA, we have a lot of hospitals that arent doing any business. We have a lot of private doctors that could do more business.
Were losing a lot of our doctors because of Obamacare. Theyre retiring. Theyre leaving.
One of them  a friend of mine  said "I have more nurses working for me now more than before but I have more accountants" and the end result is a disaster; hes getting out of the business. Hes got nurses but hes got more accountants than he has nurses because the paperwork is so crazy.
So one of the things were going to do is if Todd or if you or if somebody has problems because of the wait  because the waits are unbelievable  5, 6, 7 days sometimes. Theyre going to a private doctor. Theyre going to go to a private hospital. Or a public hospital thats in the area. And were going to pay for that and its going to cost less money  its going to cost less money than the system we have now  and youre going to end up getting much better care. Its going to cost less and youre going to get better care


So the Keystone Pipeline, first of all, Id approve it because its thousands of jobs. Okay? I would approve it so fast, so fast.
And Hillary should have approved it.
You know, Hillary wanted to approve it but shes been dragged so far left, thats shes  forget it. Its a disaster.
So I would approve it.
But with that being said, I may want to make a better deal because you know what? Were bringing oil from Canada. Right? I may say, I want 10%. Were going to approve it but I want 10%, 15%.
Because the truth is that the Keystone Pipeline was better a while ago than it is now because we have so much because of new technology, we have so much energy underneath our own feet with the fracking and all of the other things that have emerged over the last five years, we have so much energy. And its great stuff.
We have really great quality, higher than Canada. You know, they have the tar sands, which is a problem for them. Very expensive to get it out.
We have great stuff. So I would approve it because I love the jobs of building it. I love the jobs of building it.
But I may just say, maybe we should get 10%, 15%, maybe 20% as that oil flows through our land. You know, maybe we should do that.
So Im going to look into that. But when I approve it  Ill tell you what, when I approve it, itll be a great deal for the United States. It wont be like  because right now, what were doing is were approving it, were not really getting anything. Theyre putting it underground, and thats actually good environmentally. Better than having trucks going down the road and everything else. Thats good environmentally. But were not getting  were not getting  anything much for it.
When I get finished with the Keystone, theyll be happy and well be happy. Okay?


Well, Ill tell you in all fairness, Ben Carson said yesterday or the other day that he wants to abolish Medicare. Okay? And you know what a disaster that is. Now, Im sure at some point, hell take it back. But he said he wants to abolish Medicare and one thing, people do like their Medicare; they do like it.
And you are bringing up a point that Ive heard before. Were going to look at a lot of different things.
But were going to save Social Security, were going to save Medicare and thats the way it is. Okay? Were not abolishing like other people.
 
Okay, its a lot of people but you know what? Its costing us $200 billion a year immigration in this country right now.
And Dwight Eisenhower is going to say he moved 1.5 million in the 1950s, early 1950s, moved them out.
We have tremendous illegal immigration problems. Dwight Eisenhower, nice guy, he moved 1.5 million people out of the United States. And you know what happened? He moved them right across the border and they came back and they moved them again and they came back. They moved them a third time, they came right back.
And then you know they were tougher in those days. They moved them all the way south  all the way south  and they didnt come back.
Now, we have to do it. We have no choice. We either have a country or we dont.
And I want them to come back. But I want them to come back with papers. I want them to come back legally. I want them to come back. The good ones. The good ones. But only the good ones.
We got some bad ones. Remember the heat I took with illegal immigration? Remember that heat? For two weeks. Rush Limbaugh said "He has received more incoming than any human being Ive ever seen." And then he double-downed
You know what? I took a lot of heat and then you had Kate in San Francisco, killed, shot in the back and so many others. And people started looking.
And let me tell you, we have some wonderful people over here and theyre here illegally but theyre wonderful people. Okay? And well try to get them back real soon and well do it through a legal process.
But we also have some really bad gang members. You know, some of the gangs in LA. Theyre made up of illegal immigrants.
And we have unbelievable police forces that dont get the respect that they should get. They dont get it. I mean, what they go through, its unbelievable. Theyre afraid to talk to anybody. They dont want to lose their jobs. They dont want to lose their pensions. They cant talk.
Now, let me just tell you something. You can always have bad apples. In this room, we have a couple of bad apples. Okay? I dont know who they are or where they are but you do. Probably mostly back there in the press.
But the police do an unbelievable job. And they know the gangs. You go to LA the LA cops. You got Chicago, the Chicago cops. These people are amazing people if they would be allowed to do their jobs. But theyre not allowed to do their jobs.
And were going to get the bad ones out of here so fast and theyre not coming back and I dont want to put them in our jails because I dont want to subsidize these various countries where they come from for the next 45 years. I dont want them in our jails. We have hundreds of thousands right now in our jails. I dont want them in our jails.
I heard a couple of these candidates saying, "Well, theyre  " Theyre such babies.
But you know what? Theyre talking about putting them in jail. Well, I dont want them. Our jails are over-brimming. I want to use our jails for people that are supposed to be there. Okay? And I dont want to put these really bad dudes  I mean, they are bad  I dont want to have to pay for them for the next 45 years. Okay?
And were going to deal very humanely with the good people and they are mostly good people. But weve got some real bad ones and theyre out of here. Your head will spin probably.
Somebody said the other day, "Whats the first thing youre going to do?" Well, were going to work immediately on repealing Obamacare.
You know, the one good thing about executive orders? The one good thing? You know, Obama signed an executive order where everybody just come in. Come in.
We have great border patrol people. I got to know them a couple of months ago when I went down to Texas to the border. Theyre great people. Theyre not allowed to do their job. They stand there and watch people walk right in front of them smiling at them. They want to do their job; theyre not allowed to.
So the executive order that President Obama signed, the one good thing about an executive order, in the first minute in office, I will counter-sign and revoke those executive orders. Theyll be revoked. The only good thing.
Its actually the only good thing about an executive order is that a new president can just do a signature and thats the end of that.
So were going to clean up our border. Were going to make it fantastic. Were going to be proud to be a country again and a lot of good things are going to happen.


We will support Israel 1,000%.
Israel feels so left alone and I know BiBi and a lot of my friends are from Israel and they feel so left out.
And so many people say, you know, I have so many Jewish friends where they say why did I support Obama? I think hes the worst thing thats ever happened to Israel. And we will support Israel beyond anything they ever have before. Okay?
Thats an easy one. Thats the easiest question of the night!


 
The wall is a big factor. 60%, 70%. The drugs are a great question.
We are going to stop drugs.
Look, I told you before  Mexico  $45 to $50 billion. Thats not including the drugs. The drugs that are coming across the border are beyond belief.
Did you see the picture last week where they had a little wall this big and they built a ramp for trucks to go over it with trucks? Did you see the picture? They think were playing games.
And Mexico is not helping us. Mexico is not helping.
Do you know if you want to become a citizen of Mexico  I love the Mexican people. I have many Mexican people and Hispanics working for me. In Nevada, Im number one. Im rated number one in the polls with the Hispanics. Everyones shocked.
Because the Hispanics that are here legally, those people they want me, they know Im going to bring jobs and everything else. They dont want people pouring in.
But I will tell you Mexico has got to help us.
You know, if you want to become a citizen of Mexicodo you know its one of the hardest countries in the world to become a citizen of? And yet, people pour right through into us, into us. They call us the dumb Americans. Thats what they call us because of our leaders. They call us the dumb Americans.
If you want to become a citizen of Mexico, you could take the best person in this room, the most qualified, youre not going to do it. They dont do that.
And if youre there illegally and if you overstay your bound? Youre not going to be there illegally. But if you have a pass for two weeks and you overstay your bound, they have cops waiting for you. They have police that say, "You know you have one day left." I hear its unbelievable. Im impressed actually. Because to a certain extent, thats the way its supposed to be.
But if you want to become a citizen of Mexico, its impossible. They dont have anchor babies in Mexico. Youre born a baby in Mexico, its like bye-bye.
Here, youre born over here, "Oh, congratulations were taking care of the baby for 85 years." Not going to happen. Its not going to happen. No, its not going to happen.
By the way, this is important, I sort of lucked into this one. The 14th Amendment. It says right there  you know, everybody says you have to go through a whole process, itll take many years, you have to go through every state. You have to do another amendment. Its wrong. 14th Amendment covers it.
And some of the best legal minds in the world say "Trump is right." I said, "What? I am? I didnt know." I lucked into it. Every once in a while you luck.
The fact is somebody comes in illegally and they have a baby, were not responsible. Now, we may have a court case but were going to win it. And a simple act of Congress gets rid of it. And a lot of people didnt know that. Okay?
And the reason I said it can be possible because nobody could be foolish enough to allow a thing like that. How could it be possible? And were one of the only countries where that takes place.
And honestly, I use Mexico as an example because theyre so tough. If that happens in Mexico, they dont even know what youre talking about. What are you talking about? But with us? No good. Not going to happen anymore.


 
Well, you know, the amazing thing is that the politicians in this country live by a whole different standard when it comes to health care, when it comes to everything they have including what you just said about Social Security.
Our politicians live by a different standard and I think that shouldnt happen. And some of them tried to do it.
You know the story in Obamacare, they dont have to take it. They live by a different standard. And thats not going to happen. Everybodys going to live by the same standard. Theyre going to have the same standard as the poorest person in this room. Thats the way its going to be.
 
Its a good question. But do you know if I answer that question, wed have a big, big story. You know that, right?
You know, Ill tell you, it is a question thats asked a lot.
I know a lot of good people. A couple of people on the stage that I really respect, Ive gotten to respect.
But the truth is too early. I like to get things done first. Weve got to close the deal. I dont want to think about it.
There are a lot of good people. There are a lot of good people. Weve got to close the deal. Weve got to get it done. And to get it done, I want Iowa.
So good luck everybody. Thank you very much. I love you. I love you. Thank you. And well be back. Thank you.


So, were going to be discussing something so important for our country, for our economy, and for getting us all working again and working well again.
Its a tax reform that I think will make America strong and great again.
Too few Americans are working. Too many jobs are being shipped overseas. And too many middle income families cannot make ends meet.
This plan directly meets these challenges and the challenges also of business.
It will provide major tax relief for middle income and for most other Americans. There will be a major tax reduction.
It will simplify the tax code. It will grow the American economy at a level it hasnt seen for decades.
And all of this does not add to our debt or our deficit.
But I will also be discussing some of that at the end because we have to make much better deals, we have to negotiate much harder, and weve got to make our economy strong.
Changes for individuals will be at levels that you havent seen in a long time.
Were going to cut the individual rates from 7 brackets to 4. Simplification. 25%, 20%, 10%, and 0%.
If youre single and earn less than $25,000 per year or married and jointly earn less than $50,000  so, very important. If youre single and earn less than $25,000 or married and jointly earn less than $50,000, youll not pay any income tax  nothing.
This eliminates very strongly and quickly the marriage penalty. Very unfair penalty.
It eliminates the AMT, which is the alternative minimum tax.
It ends the death tax. Its a double taxation. A lot of families go through hell over the death tax.
It reduces or eliminates most of the deductions and loopholes available to special interests or to the very rich  in other words, its going to cost me a fortune, which is actually true  while preserving charitable giving and mortagage interest deductions. Very importantly.
It ends the current tax treatment of carried interest. Those are the hedge fund folks that Ive been talking about for quite a while. They make a lot of money. Carried interest.
So it ends the current tax treatment of carried interest through speculative partnerships that do not grow businesses or create jobs and are not risking their own capital.
Changes for business  now, so important, because its all about business. Its all about jobs.
We have 93 million people in this country that are in serious trouble, that want to work; they cant work.
So for business, no business of any size from a Fortune 500 company to a mom and pop shop to a freelancer living from gig to gig will pay more than 15% of their business income in taxes. Big reduction.
A one-time deemed repatriation of corporate cash held overseas at significantly discount which coming back at a significantly discount  10%. So it comes back discounted at a 10% tax rate and ends the deferral of taxes on corporate income earned abroad.
Now, its called corporate inversion. Its a huge subject.
Ive been watching politicians now for years  all talk, no action politicians. Ive been watching them for years talking about bringing this money back.


The number is probably $2.5 trillion.
Everybody agrees it should come back  Republicans, Democrats, everybody.
They cant make a deal. They dont know how to go about making a deal.
The reason companies arent bringing it back is the tax is onerous. It doesnt make sense to bring it back.
And in fact, many companies are leaving the United States. Theyre leaving our shores to go and collect their money.
Theyre going actually moving out of the United States for two reasons  the taxes are too high and because they have tremendous amounts of money that they cant bring back into this country when everybody wants them to bring it back in.
Its called leadership.
We will have that money brought back in.
As an example, I have millions of dollars overseas. I cant bring it back into this country. We filed papers. Weve been doing this for a year and a half. We cant get it back in.
So the money stays in other countries and thats what happens. Not good for us.
The level of leadership that we need to get things like this done is so important. But this is something  and Ive been watching it for a long time  everybody agrees to.
We also reduce or eliminate some business loopholes  many of them actually  and deductions made unnecessary or redundant by the new lower tax rate on business income.
The tax rate now is so low that a lot of these deductions which are complicated, which dont make sense, and which are unfair are gone.
And we phase in a reasonable cap on the deductability of the business interest expense.
So we are going to give you  we have a very complex set of papers that actually if you know business is not so complex. And were going to hand them out right now to the press.
And I think youll see we have an amazing code. It will be simple. It will be easy. It will be fair.
Its graduated. As you get up in income, you pay a little more.
Some of the very unfair deductions that certain people have been given who make a lot of money will not be available any longer.
But I actually believe theyll do better because I think the economy will grow. It will grow rapidly. And well have something very special.
Now, with all of that being said and before we take some questions, we have to cut the costs of whats going on in this country.
If you look at what were doing and the money were spending. I read where a washer  you know what a washer is? Nuts, bolts, and washer  to send from one state to another, it was a 19 set washer and it cost $900,000 and some odd dollars to send it from here to there.
And there are many examples. Hammers that cost $800 that you can buy in the store for a tiny amount of money.
We will run this country properly. There is so much money to be saved.
Were reducing taxes but at the same time if I win, if I become President, we will be able to cut so much money and have a better country.
We wont be losing anything other than well be balancing budgets and getting them where they should be.
So, this is a plan thats simple, thats a major reduction. I think people are going to be very happy. Weve already had some very good reviews.
I did the plan with some of the leading scholars and economists and tax experts that there are in this country. They love it; they say "Why hasnt this been done before?"
And this is my wheelhouse. Thats what I do well.
The economy is what I do well. Whenever they do polls, I always come out way above everybody else on the economy and on leadership, by the way, but I wont say that.
So, if anybody has  [applause]  thank you. Thats amazing. Thats some of the press was actually clapping. Ive never saw  I dont think Ive ever seen that before.
All right. Why dont we take some questions from the press?


 




No, Im not going to do that yet but we have their approval. But we have some of the top people in the country worked on this.
 




Well, were looking at a 3% but we think it can be 5%, it could even be 6%. Were going to have growth that will be tremendous.
And by the way, if we have more than 3%, these numbers are really spectacular.
And one of the things that they dont take into account in any big league fashion is the cutting. There is so much waste in government and I believe when I get in there Ill be able to cut without losing anything to cut tremendous amounts off of the  and were not even showing anything for that.
So, theyre very conservative numbers.
 




My taxes will  first of all, Ill have a much simpler tax statement. It will be much simpler.
When I do my return, it will be much  my return go up to the ceiling and beyond, which is ridiculous. And you spend millions of dollars at a high level on lawyers, accountants, and everything else.
We want to simplify them to a tremendous level.
The bracket of 25%  the big difference is many of the loopholes and many of the deductions which are all  theyve been there for years  are antiquated in many cases.
Or are put there because a lot of the people that get these deductions are contributed to Hillary, theyre contributing to Bush. Theyre contributing to every candidate but Trump. Because Im not taking any money. Im self-funding. And these people want these deductions.
There will be people  were reducing taxes. But believe me, there will be people in the very upper eschelons that wont be thrilled with this.
Were taking away deductions and thats one of the reasons were able to lower it.
 




This is actually a tax reduction. A big tax reduction, including for the upper income.
I believe that the economy will do so well that even though they wont be getting certain deductions which arent fair for them to be getting that theyll end up doing better.
 




I just think this is a common sense approach. You know, we could say supply side. You could say theres 15 different names given out for different kinds of deductions or increases. I dont think its supply side or anything else.
I think this is a common sense, well thought out tax proposal thats going to trigger the economy, going to make everybody go back and really want to work.
Its going to create tremendous numbers of jobs.
One of the other things that Im coupling this with is if I become President, Im going to renegotiate our trade deals. Because our trade deals are not sustainable by this country. Not sustainable.
We cannot continue to let our jobs go to all of the different countries. Theres not a country that we negotiate with that doesnt make a better deal. Everybody.
We lose money with everything.
Im also going to renegotiate some of our military costs. Because we protect South Korea, we protect Germany, we protect some of the wealthiest countries in the world  Saudi Arabia  we protect everybody. We protect everybody.
And we dont get reimbursement. We lose on everything. We lose on everything.
So, were going to negotiate and renegotiate trade deals, military deals, many other deals thats going to get the costs down for running our country very significantly. Im not showing a big number in that. But I believe that if I become President, those numbers are going to be massive.
As an example, Saudi Arabia. They make $1 billion a day. We protect them.
So we need help.
Were losing a tremendous amount of money on a yearly basis and we owe $19 trillion.
I used to say $18 trillion for the last 6, 7 months; now its $19 trillion and its only going up.
 




Well, no, look. Senator [Marco] Rubio is a lightweight. We understand that. He wouldnt be able to do this. He wouldnt know a trade deal from any other deal and what certain people are trying to do is theyre trying to take  we just went up in the last poll. We went up two points in the last poll, and we continue to go up.
In the NBC poll, I think we went from 26% to 29%. Were going up very strongly in the polls. They dont know what to do about it.
Ive built a great company. Youll see that in 60 Minutes last night. I built a great company. Its a phenomenal company with very little debt, tremendous cash flow.
Im funding my own campaign.
Guys like Rubio, I mean, he desperately needs money. Ask the car dealer in Florida. Ask the people that support him.
And a guy like Rubio and others  I dont want to single him out; youre singling him out  but theyre largely controlled by their donors, the special interests, and frankly more than anybody else, the lobbyists.
Ive turned down millions of millions of dollars from lobbyists and special interests because its not the right thing. Its just not right. And that seems to be resonating very strongly.


 




I negotiate. Its true. I get bills from people; Ill negotiate. Oh, is that a bad thing? The country should do that.
 




Yeah, I would. Id bring that same attitude to the White House. Its true.
She says I have a habit when you get a bill, youd call up and you negotiate. To me, thats a compliment.
No, I want to take that thinking to the White House. I would bet you we could save 20% of our budget. I could even save more. But we could save a tremendous amount.
That has to be the attitude our country has. You cant spend millions and millions of dollars on doing something that you can do for $2,000.
You know, when you look at costs, we just spent $1 million building a soccer field. Okay? A soccer field for our prisoners that happen to be in Guantanamo. Okay? I dont like that. What do you need $1 million for? Level out the surface, let them play  if they had to play at all. Okay? What do you need to spend $1 million.
We just spent  its a story today. $1 million on a soccer field. How do you spend $1 million doing a soccer field? You have a level piece of land. Throw them a ball if they have to play soccer  if they have to play at all. Why are they playing soccer is my question.
 




No, its too long. You dont have time. You dont have time.
 




No, not at all. Were lowering taxes, which Republicans love.
And I think one of the reasons I am doing so well in the polls and one of the reasons Im doing so well when it comes to the economy in all polls is that this is the thinking.
No, were lowering taxes very substantially. Were simplifying. And were getting rid of deductions that are actually obselete that certain people want to keep for certain reasons.
So, no, thats not true.
 




Well, Putin was interviewed and I was interviewed last night. I thought his interview  I though Charlie Rose did an excellent job. But I thought his was a softer interview.
Scott Pelley interviewed me. I thought Scott was terrific. I mean, it was a tough interview but I thought he was very fair and I thought the piece was very good.
 




Why is he harder on me than Putin? I would say because Putin is a nicer person than I am.
 




The worst in 36 years. Well, its a good question and you can connect the dots. But I guess it has been probably since 04. You know, youre talking about 10, 11, 12 years that people have wanted to bring the money back into the country.
And again its called corporate inversion and in a lot of time corporations are moving out and theyre going to other countries, taking jobs.
And now, we have a really big problem because we have serious companies  very large, very prestigious companies as you know  obviously you know something about business. But we have major companies looking to move out of the United States.
You know, it used to be theyd move from New York to Florida. Theyd move from New Jersey to Texas. Or whatever.
Now, theyre talking about moving from the United States to Ireland and to England and to other places, to Spain where they get treated differently and frankly better.
And theyre doing that for a number of reasons but one of the reasons  one of the big reasons  as you know is taxes. One of the other reasons is to get all of this cash that theyve built up and they cant get back into our country.
And when this money comes back into our country that everybody wants, its going to be put to work in our country, largely. It can go other places. But largely.
And I think it will be an amazing boon.
Now, heres the other thing. They think its $2.5 trillion. I think its much more than that.
I actually think its going to be more money than that. And boy if it is, we have hit pay dirt.


 




Well, you know when you end the repatriation, when you get the money coming back in beyond, tremendous things happen.
 




Well, Ill be announcing that in the not too distant future.
But I will tell you. Ive been honest. Im the only one thats honest about this thing.
I watched Romney. I watched all  "Oh, I pay so much tax. I pay so much tax." I watched all politicians and they say "I pay  "
I fight like hell to pay as little as possible. Can I say that? Im not a politician.
I fight like hell always because its an expense.
And you know, I feel  I fight. I have the best lawyers and the best accountants and I fight. And I pay. But its an expense.
And frankly, I would feel differently if this country was spending the money wisely instead of throwing it out the drain.
Our country spends our money so stupidly and I will tell you that I could speak for myself I pay a lot of tax but I fight like hell to make it as low as possible. But I would feel a lot differently if our leadership was such that I respected the decisions.
All you have to do is look at a list of the things that our government is spending money on right now and you dont feel so good about our country.
 




Ill tell you what in terms of income inequality, were going to create a lot of jobs.
You know, right now, we have a false  5.4%, 5.3%, 5.6%  every month its different.
Its such a phony number. Because when people look and look and look and then they give up looking for a job, theyre taken off the roll. So the number isnt reflective.
Ive seen numbers of 24%. I actually saw a number of 42% unemployment. 42%.
And it could be because when youre looking for a job and you go around and you look and you look and you find it, you want to work and you want to take care of your family and then you cant get the job  you know what Im talking about because youre shaking your head  and you cant get the job, essentially for statistically purposes you are considered employed.
So then I read every time it comes out I hear 5.3% unemployment. That is the biggest joke there is in this country.
That number is so false.
And you know, people ask "How come Trump is doing so well? And Carson and others? How come theyre doing -?" You know why theyre doing well? Because people are tired of political speak. Theyre tired of that.
And the worst example of it  one of the worst example of it  is the phony unemployment rate.
The unemployment rate is probably 20%. But I will tell you you have some great economists that will tell you its 30%, 32%. And the highest Ive heard so far is 42%.
Theres anger out there at the job picture.
Now, one of the things  with that being said, China, Japan, Mexico, Brazil, these countries are all taking our jobs like were a bunch of babies.
That will stop. People will treat us fairly if I become President.
Were losing our jobs. Were losing our base. Were losing our manufacturing.
All of that will stop.
 




Well, this is number one a simplification. Number two, what Im really doing is the big picture because corporations now are going to start having an incentive to create jobs. Theyre going to have an incentive also to stay in this country.
 




Well, if they provide bigger dividends, people are going to have more money to spend. So thats not so bad either.
If a corporation gives out a bigger dividend, thats great. Mr. Jones gets a bigger dividend, hes going to have more money to spend in the economy. So thats good.
 




I know nothing about that.
 




No, Im not a populist. No, Im not. Im a man of great common sense. Im a man thats built a tremendous company with the best locations in real estate, the best everything. Youre here at one of them. I have many of these.
Ive done a great job. Ive employed tens of thousands of people. I employ now thousands and thousands of people. Ive done a good job.
But I wouldnt say populist at all. I would say Im a man of common sense.
Im cutting taxes. Im going to create a lot of jobs. Im going to get rid of a tremendous amount of waste.
And Ill tell you what. The waste that I get rid of  the waste that I get rid of  is going to have a huge impact and Im not even putting that in my numbers so I think its going to be terrific.
 




Yes, the motor industry. Thats a beautiful way of describing it  the motor industry.
Where are you from? England? I love them. Oh, what a beautiful accent.
No, I want to get the industry  we call it the automobile industry.
But I want to get the automobile industry to build factories here.
As you know, Ford is building $2.5 billion factory in Mexico.
Mexico also took a big plant out of Tennessee and Tennessee thought they were going to get it and they didnt.
I want the motor companies, as you would say, or the automobile companies to build their plants in the United States.
I dont want Nabisco leaving for Mexico or any place else.
I want these companies not to leave Chicago, not to leave Michigan, not to leave New Hampshire and Iowa and South Carolina and all of these places where theyre leaving and theyre going to other countries.
I want them to stay here and they will stay here and theyll be so happy.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much. Its been a great honor. Thank you.


Autism has become an epidemic.
25 years ago, 35 years ago, you look at the statistics. Not even close.
It has gotten totally out of control.
I am totally in favor of vaccines but I want smaller doses over a longer period of time.
Because you take a baby in  and Ive seen it and Ive seen it and I had my children taken care of over a long period of time, over a two or three year period of time, same exact amount. But you take this little beautiful baby and you pump  I mean, it looks just like its meant for a horse not for a child.
And weve had so many instances  people that work for me just the other day  two years old, two and a half years old, a child  a beautiful child  went to have the vaccine and came back and a week later got a tremendous fever, got very, very sick, now is autistic.
I only say  Im in favor of vaccines. Do them over a longer period of time. Same amount but just in little sections.
And I think youre going to have  I think youre going to see a big impact on autism.


Boy, oh, boy. I didnt expect that. You know, Joe [Arends] and the group [Veterans for a Strong America] called and they said "Would you come over and speak?"
Im here for a certain reason. You know, its called tomorrow night. So I got here and they asked a couple of days ago if it would possible to come over and say a few words. An endorsement from your group with so many veterans  hundreds of thousands of veterans  I really appreciate that, Joe. I did not expect that.
I didnt expect it. I didnt ask for it.
I will say this: I am with the veterans 100%. Theyre our greatest people. Theyre being treated terribly.
Not only the number of deaths, which are obviously  thats whats going on is incredible.
But as of two weeks ago on Wednesday, the vets had the longest wait in the history of the Veterans Administration. You go in to see a doctor, you wait for days, for days.
And its not going to happen. Not going to happen. If I win, believe me, its not going to happen.
And one of the things I thought Id do and Id stress so strongly  the veterans hospitals  obviously they have problems. Theyre not properly run.
And when you have to wait long hours and long days and then in some cases have the doctor say "Im sorry. Im going on vacation", believe me, it doesnt get much worse than that.
So were going to create a whole new system. Were going to take this system apart.
And if theyre not doing the job, the veterans are going to go to private doctors, private hospitals, public hospitals, and were going to reimburse those doctors and those hospitals.
And youre going to get the greatest service of any veterans in any country because you deserve it. And thats going to be broken down into something thats going to be very special.
Right now  and you know it  we have illegal immigrants that are treated better by far than our veterans. Its not going to happen anymore. Its not going to happen.
So, Joe, I just really appreciate it. So unexpected.
To be here is an honor. They dont build ships like this anymore, folks. You know? We dont do them this way anymore.
I actually said what about recommissioning  look at this thing. The largest guns in the world. The most powerful guns. I learned about the Iowa.
By the way, Iowa is a great place for a lot of reasons. You know? We have been treated so well in the state of Iowa. Its been incredible. Number one on the polls and we love those people. Theyre great.
So this is a great ship and thats a great state.


I just want to say that were going to come out with some plans in a very short time.
Were going to be building up our military. Were going to make our military so big and so strong and so great.
And it will be so powerful that I dont think were going to ever have to use it. Nobodys going to mess with us. That I can tell you.
And were going to have a President whos respected by Putin, whos respected by Iran.
You know, lets talk about for two seconds, lets talk about the Iran deal.
Now, Obama and his people call him the Supreme Leader of Iran. Obama talks about the Supreme Leader. Well, Im not calling him a Supreme Leader.
But he said the other day that after this rip-off deal is completed, he will never touch, do business with the United States again. "Were finished with the United States."
Theyre taking $150 billion. Theyre getting a deal thats going to go right into nuclear weapons much sooner than you think.
Theyre going to self-police  think about that one  they are going to go and self-police.
Theyve got the 24-day  they have 24-day provisions. And by the way, what people dont understand  the 24-day provision doesnt start  you know this, right? It doesnt start for a long time before you even get to it. The clock is ticking. It can take forever. We may never get it there.
It is one of the dumbest deals and one of the weakest contracts Ive ever seen of any kind.
So, we are going to do things and this country right.
Were not going to sign deals where we have four prisoners over there and theres still there and we dont even ask for them.
One of them is there because hes a Christian. We have a writer. We have  the whole thing is absolutely insane.
You know, they asked the President, and they asked Secretary of State Kerry who maybe  you know, Ive been saying Hillary Clinton is the worst Secretary of State in the history of this country. Right? All right. Ive been saying it. But its possible  the world blew up around her. It blew up. Just blew up. The whole world is like a different place.
Its possible that because of this deal made by Secretary Kerry who has absolutely no clue how to negotiate, it may that hes going to supersede. And I understand that he may want to run for President. He has no chance like she has no chance.
So were going to see what happens.
We have many problems in our country. One of them is immigration.
Now, I took a tremendous hit when I brought up illegal immigration when I announced I was running for President.
And for two weeks, I said  you know, Rush Limbaugh  hes a great guy  he said "He has suffered more incoming"  meaning the press  "than anybody Ive seen."
So what happened is you have now found out what illegal immigration is all about and I am so happy that Im the one that brought it to the fore because believe me, its a big problem. It is a big problem.
So you remember for about two weeks, I said, "Boy this is tougher than I thought running for President." And then you found out theres tremendous crime. Theres tremendous drugs pouring across the border. Tremendous. Beyond. Going to Chicago, going to New York, going to LA, going all over our country.


So the drugs pour in and the money pours out. Not a good deal. We get the drugs, they get the money. The drug cartels are going wild. They cannot believe how stupid our government is.
They are making a fortune. The drugs come in. The money goes out daily. And I saw it because I was on the border. I was there. And we saw it. And everybody sees it everyday.
And we have the kind of people that can do something about it but we have no leadership. None. None whatsoever.
So, were going to build a wall and Mexicos going to pay for the wall, believe me. You know, a lot of politicians have said "Oh, theyre not going to pay". They dont know anything about  they never read the Art of the Deal, first of all.
So heres the story. So heres the story. I said the other day to one of my people "What is the United States trade deficit with Mexico, Japan, and China?"
So lets start with China. Almost $400 billion a year.
Now, if you have a company where youre losing $400 billion, youve got to do something very fast.
We dont. Weve been losing hundreds of billions of dollars a year frankly for decades.
Not going to happen anymore. Not going to happen anymore.
With Japan where their massive ships floating right here and they drop off the cars, right? They drop off thousands and thousands and thousands of cars  millions of cars  and we sell them beef. We sell them beef.
And they dont want it because their farmers dont want our beef. They protest and they send it back. All right?
Its not going to happen that way anymore.
Now, with Mexico  and I love Mexico. I have many, many people  many, many people from Mexico that work with me and they work for me and they buy my apartments.
Same with China. I have so many people. They pay me millions and millions. What am I supposed to hate China because they gave me millions of dollars to buy an apartment? I dont think so.
I had the largest bank in the world as a tenant. Its from China. Bigger than any bank in this country by many times. Theyre from China.
The problem that we have is that the leaders of Mexico, Japan, and China and every other country that we do business with, theyre smarter, more cunning, sharper than our leaders.
I love free trade. The concept is great. But you need smart people.


I have the smartest people in this country lined up. I know the smartest.
I have Carl Icahn. I have the best business leaders and they all want to do it. Theyre wealthy because they make good deals like me. I make good deals.
You know, its a talent. Its a talent. You cant be a politician.
Look, Im fighting some very nice people. Very nice. Even though Im leading in the polls. But theyre very nice people.
But theyre never going to do anything with these countries. Theyre never going to be able to do it. Its an instinct. Its something thats special. They dont have it. Believe me, they dont have it.
Its just going to be more of the same.
So, we are going to make our country so great.
We are going to make it strong. We are going to make it powerful.
Were going to rebuild the military. Were going to make it so strong.
We are going to take care of our veterans.
And in the end, in the end, I want you people to look around and look at each other because this is going to be a special day.
The other week  two weeks ago in Mobile, Alabama, 31,000 people showed up in a rainy rough day. 31,000 people came to see us speak and were talking about making America great again.
Last night in Dallas at the American Airlines Center, 20,000 people  the basketball arena of the Mavericks. 20,000 people showed up and I want to tell you, it was a love fest. Everybody  think of it, 20,000 people  there wasnt one heckler in the whole room. I kept saying, "Theres got to be one."
There was a word  two words that used to be used a lot called "silent majority". They stopped using them.
The silent majority, believe me, is back and I think we can use it somewhat different.
I dont think we have to call it a silent majority anymore because theyre not silent. People are not silent.
Theyre disgusted with our incompetent politicians.
Theyre disgusted with the people that are giving our country away.
Theyre disgusted when they tell the border patrol agents who are good people and can do the job.
Theyre disgusted when theyre allowed people to just walk right in front of them and theyre standing there helpless and people just pour into the country.
Theyre disgusted when a woman whos nine months pregnant, walks across the border, has a baby, and you have to take care of that baby for the next 85 years.
Theyre disgusted by whats happening to our country.
And youre going to look around and youre going to remember who the people are that are here because were doing something special. This is a movement. Were going to make our country great again.
Believe me, we will make our country great again.
I love you all. Thank you very much.


Thank you very much, everybody. Thank you all for being here. This is some turnout. My great honor.
The Chairman just left as you probably know and hes been extremely fair. The RNC has been absolutely terrific over the last two month period.
And as you know, thats what Ive wanted. I wanted fairness.
I dont have to be treated any differently than anybody else. I just wanted fairness from the Republican Party.
Were leading in every single poll. A new poll came out today where were over 30%. Weve actually hit numbers as high as 35% and 40%.
And frankly, Ive felt that the absolute best way to win and to beat the Democrats and very easily I think beat the Democrats no matter who it may be whether its Hillary or anybody else and I think maybe Hillary is going to have a very hard time frankly with whats happening getting to the starting gate, the best way for the Republicans to win is if I win the nomination and go directly against whoever they happen to put up.
And for that reason, I have signed the pledge.
So I will be totally pledging my allegiance to the Republican Party and the conservative principles for which it stands and we will go out and we will fight hard and we will win. We will win.
And most importantly, we will make our country great again because thats what its all about. We have to make our country great again.






This is a self-funded campaign. We have our heart in it. We have our soul in it. I dont need money and I dont want money.
And this is going to be a campaign like I think no other.
Im not controlled by lobbyists. Im not controlled by anybody. Im controlled by the people of the country in order to make our country great again.






Yeah, I got nothing. I really got nothing.
The question was what did I get for signing the pledge? Absolutely nothing. Other than the assurance that I would be treated fairly. And Ive seen that over the last two months. They really have been very fair.






No, I have no intention of changing my mind.






Well, I think the big thing thats changed is  and its been obvious to all  number one, after I announced, we went up like a rocket ship.
Nobody thought I was going to run and they said "Oh, he wont run and he wont put in his papers. And he wouldnt do all of this."
I did that. The papers in terms of the company turned out to be spectacular. Its a great company. I built a great company. And all of the other papers have turned out to be very well received.
And I think the thing thats changed is the fact that I went to number one place very quickly after I signed and after I in this building notified everybody that Id be running for President.
So I think the biggest thing is that I went early to number one and the RNC has treated me with great respect.
So that was very important.






No, I see no circumstances under which I would tear up that pledge.






Well, you dont have to be met when youre at 2%. Its one of those things. Thats the way life works. And I like Gov. [Chris] Christie, by the way.






Well, the Chairman asked if he could come up. You saw him. He was here a little while ago. And I was greatly honored that he did come up frankly.






Well, I think that when you get right down to it, were a nation that speaks English and I think that while were in this nation, we should be speaking English. And thats how assimilation takes. And thats how  I mean, whether people like it or not thats how we assimilate and thats how we go on to that next phase and that next stage.
And thats how people that dont speak  and Im not just talking about Spanish; Im talking about from various parts of the world  thats how they will become successful and do great.
So I think its more appropriate to be speaking English.








Well, one of the things I want to do and I feel very strongly its a country based on borders and our country is based on laws.
And when people come into the country illegally, we should not allow that.
And this is not from South America. This is not from Mexico. This is from all over the world.
When people come illegally, we cannot allow that.
And I want people to come legally. I want very much to take care of our border because our southern border is a total mess. Thats been proven.
And interestingly, a couple of months ago when I announced, I made some very strong statements about the crime and the problems that were happening and Ive been proven right.
And many of the people in this audience actually have apologized to me, which I very much appreciate. Of course, they havent done it publicly but these are minor details but someday they will.
The fact is that we are a nation that wants and needs borders. Were a nation that wants and needs and is based on laws.
And we will make sure that that takes place.
With that being said, I want people to come into our country legally. I want to have a big, fat beautiful open door. I want people of great talent to come in for Silicon Valley. I want engineers. I want physicists. I want people with great talent to come into the United States.
When people graduate from college, you can be number one in your class at Harvard or number one at Yale or the Wharton School of Finance or Princeton or Stanford. And immediately if youre not a citizen of the United States, you get thrown out of the country. We want those people to stay.
We want people of great talent to be in the United States to work here and ultimately to become a citizen.






I dont know enough about it to comment on it. Was she jailed? I really dont know much about it.






Thats absolutely false. I win at golf. I win at golf. That I can tell you.






Well, I understand how the system works maybe better than anybody. I understand the political system and I understand also very much a system for coming in for illegal immigrants.
Dont forget if I didnt bring up the subject of illegal immigration, you wouldnt be asking the question. Nobody would be even talking about immigration. And immigration and in particular illegal immigration has become a very big factor.
Now, a lot of bad things have happened with respect to crime since I brought it up.
But if I didnt bring it up, immigration would not even be a subject that were talking about and it happens to be a very important subject.
I have to say this: It can also be a very positive subject because I believe so strongly in immigration and I just  we have to stop illegal immigration and we have to look forward to great immigration done in a legal manner.
But if I didnt bring it up, nobody would be talking about it.






Well, there is gridlock in Congress right now and thats because theres no leadership at the top. You have to be able to lead. You have to be able to get people into your office. You have to get people go to them. Any way you want to do it. But you have to be able to lead. There is no leadership at the top.
Signing executive orders it not the way our country was supposed to be run.








I dont want to talk about that. Its inappropriate.






Tom Brady? Well, Tom Brady is a very good friend of mine. Hes a great guy.
For those of you who dont know him, hes a very honorable and an honest guy and a truly great athlete. He is really a very good friend of mine.
And I just spoke to him a little while ago. Hes so thrilled and so happy.
Tom Brady  I think what theyve done is terrible. And hes been exonerated as I understand it because I just heard about it. But Im very happy for Tom.
As far as the Commissioner is concerned, theyre having a rough year. Lets face it. Theyre having a very rough year.






Well, in Europe they have tremendous problems with people going in and storming. And its a huge humanitarian problem.
And I just say this. This United States has tremendous problems of their own. We have infrastructure that we have to fix. We have bridges and roads and tunnels and everything is falling apart. Our nations in such trouble.
Thats why being a builder and a great builder and a very successful builder I think will greatly help.
But we have so many of our own problems including the border, including the wall, which we will get built, including all of the things we have  health care, which is a mess.
You know, if you look at Obamacare, the premiums have gone up 45%, 50%, 55%. People are saying "This is turning out to be a disaster." Deductibles are through the roof. The deductibles on Obamacare its through the roof.
So we have a lot of problems. We have to take care of our vets. We have to build up our military.
Just the other day, Gen. [Ray] Ordierno said that the Army is in the worst shape in its history in terms of preparedness.
Now, for them to be in bad shape with the way we are and with the world hating us, and you look at Hillary Clinton  and Ive said shes the worst Secretary of State in the history of this country.
Now, in all fairness, because of the agreement thats about to be finalized with Iran, John Kerry may very well take her place.
I think that agreement is a disaster for this country, for Israel, for the Middle East. Its going to lead to nuclear proliferation  the 24-day clause  everything about it. We dont even get our prisoners back. You say who negotiates a thing like that?
That wont happen, I can guarantee you, with a President Trump.






Youll see it later. Yeah. They dont want to hear it.






I would say very simply I just want to be treated like everybody else.
You see, I was always the fair hair boy. I was a big contributor. Nobody knows the system. But I was on the other side. And I was the elite. I was the fair hair person.
Once I ran, all of a sudden I was a little bit of an outsider. I became an outsider because I was running. Because I wasnt supposed to run.
Im this businessman that people have given me great credit as being a great businessman. But Im not supposed to be running for office.
The fact is that our country is being killed on trade by China, by Japan, by Mexico both at the border and on trade.
And Im not knocking those countries. Their leaders are much, much smarter than our leaders. They are absolutely killing us.
China  taking our jobs, taking our money, taking our base. And think of this: We owe China $1.4 trillion and were paying them interest.
We owe Japan with all of the cars coming in the same amount  $1.4 trillion.
Now, thats like a magic act. They send the cars in, they take our jobs, they do everything, and we owe them money. Thats not going to happen with me.








Well, Jeb Bush is a very nice man. Ill be honest. I think hes a very nice person. I think hes a very low energy person and I dont think thats what the country needs.
I hear hes going to spend a lot of money on negative ads on me.
And honestly, look, hes getting the money from special interests. Hes getting the money from lobbyists and his donors. And theyre making him do it because hes crashing in the polls.
So I dont know whats going to happen if he spends $20 million or $25 million on negative ads  I dont know. I know that my life will continue. I just dont know. I mean nobodys ever spent money on ads against me. But he probably has to do that although it would not be the way Ive done.
You know, one of the things Im most honored about is that so far everybody thats attacked me has gone down the tubes.
You have Lindsey Graham attacked me. He was at 3%. Now hes at zero.
You have Perry attacked me. Now hes getting out of the race. He was at 4% or 5%. Now hes getting out of the race. He was at zero.
Everybody  Rand Paul attacked me. I see the last poll  the Monmouth poll that just came out today where Im leading by double figures and Rand Paul is down to less than 2% and he attacked me.
Now, Jeb Bush also just went down in the Monmouth poll very big.
So I dont know. Are they going to spend  hes going to spend lobbyist money and special interest money. Remember this  they have total control over Jeb and Hillary and everybody else that takes that money.
Nobody knows the system better than me. They have total control.
You understand it very well because youve been covering it for a long time. Those people that are putting up those millions of dollars have total control over your candidate.
I will tell you this: Nobodys putting up millions of dollars for me. Im putting up my own money.
In fact, I feel a little bit foolish. People are offering me millions and millions of dollars. You know, when youre in first place, you can collect so much money and I keep turning them down. I feel like  am I a fool? I feel very foolish.
And when I was in Iowa last week, I said "What do you think? Can I take  " One man offered me  a big lobbyist  offered $5 million for my campaign. I said to the crowd in Iowa  great crowd, 4,000 people  I said "Can I take it? And would you believe Im not going to do anything? I promise you. I swear to you I wont do anything." And they all stood up and said "No, no, dont take it."
The fact is Im the only self-funder. Im putting up my own money.
I know there have been some super PACs  5 or 6 super PACs  where people are forming super PACs for Trump. I have nothing to do with them. As you know, youre not allowed to have anything to do with them. So I dont know what theyre going to do.
Hopefully, if theyre going to do something its going to be nice. But I dont know anything about them.
But just in a nutshell, Im funding my own campaign. Nobody elses.
When people advertise  and I hope the voters can see this. Every negative ad they see about me is paid for by lobbyists and special interests. So just remember that.






Our country could be doing much better. We have deficits that are enormous. We have all bad trade agreements. We have an Army that the heads said is not prepared. We have a military that needs help and especially in these times.
We have nuclear weapons that you look at 60 Minutes they dont even work. Okay? If anybody saw that report. The phones dont work. Theyre 40 years old. They have wires that are no good.
Nothing works. Our country doesnt work.
Everybody wins except us. We need victories in this country. We dont have victories any more.
Our country will be great again, but right now our country has major problems.






I think its great that shes [Carly Fiorina] in the debate. I was in favor of her being  I think she should be in the debate.
I dont like the fact that there are 11 people now as I understand it. Theyre not getting rid of Rand Paul or somebody. But I think they should because theres too many people.
Because when you have 11, youre not getting to hear me and youre not getting to hear other people talking and I think thats too bad. I think 11 is a lot of people.
But I was very happy that she got into the debate because frankly she deserves to be in the debate.








I think maybe hes [Joe Biden] inclined not to get in the race. I think its going to depend on what happens with Hillary Clinton.
A lot of people think that she will not be able to make it legally from a criminal standpoint to the starting gate. I dont know that to be true.
But I think it depends on what happens with her.
I think if she gets out, he will get in. I think if she stays in, he might not.
Who knows?






Oh, hes not supposed to be here because he was here, he was up in my office and he got the pledge and were very happy about that. We dont want anything  and I told him. I said, "I dont know if its appropriate Reince for you to be here because I dont want anything  " You know, you guys will end up saying hes endorsing Trump.
So I suggested frankly that Im fine with him not being here because I dont want anybody to think hes endorsing.
As far as Jeb is concerned, I watched him this morning on television and its a little bit sad.
Dont forget. He was supposed to win. And he just doesnt have the energy.
But what he does have is a lot of money that was given to him again by special interests, donors, and lobbyists.
And I just hope that if he spends money on ads, which he may not  if I were him, Id spend money on positive ads about himself. Because if he knocks me, assuming people leave and maybe theyre at a point where theyre not going to leave because theyre fed up with whats happening in this country, but I think theyre going to go to people other than Jeb.






I dont know. Right now, Im interested in jobs. One thing  one of the groups, it was actually CNN. I shouldnt say that. But they did a very massive poll and I came out number one in leadership, number one on the economy, number one in jobs producing.
And I dont mean by number one. I mean like number one by many, many times. And I am so intent on putting people back to work in this country.
You know, we have 93 million people that are not in the workforce right now. 93 million.
When they give up looking for a job, they take them off of the stats. They take them off the statistics. We have 93 million people.
We have 50 million people between poverty levels and welfare and all.
Our country can be great again. We have to put people back to work.






Would I bring my children into the administration? I will tell you they are very capable. The answer is probably not. But having them in would be very good. Theyre very, very capable children.
The second part I wont bother asking you. Its no longer pertinent.






Kanye West? You know what? Ill never say bad about him. You know why? Because he loves Trump. He loves Trump. He goes around saying "Trump is my all-time hero." He says it to everybody.
So, Kanye West  I love him. Now, maybe in a few years Ill have to run against him. I dont know. So Ill take that back.
But hes been so nice to me.
You people have sort of seen because Ive been a counter-puncher. I only hit people when they hit me. Only. And Kanye West has been so great. I would never say bad about him because he says such nice things about me.






No, my supporters are really supporting me because Im very competent, because they know that Im not going to let China rip us off. Im not going to let Japan rip us off.
Japan is devaluing their yen. Very hard for Caterpillar and other companies to compete against Komatsu  their big tractor maker  and others. Were not going to let this happen anymore.
They do  you talk about a trade imbalance. They have in Japan the biggest ships youve ever seen pouring cars into Los Angeles, pouring them in. Ive never seen anything like it. We send them beef and they dont even want it.
Its going to end and theyre going to like us.
In this building, I have the largest bank in the world. Right up these elevators. Its a bank from China. By far the biggest bank in the world.
I get along great with China. I get along great with Japan. I get along great with Mexico.
I love the people. I love the people of Mexico. I love the Hispanics. I have thousands of Hispanics right now working for me. Over the years, I have employed tens of thousands of Hispanics  many from Mexico. I have unbelievably great relationships.
And in the package that we gave you, youll see theres a poll and Im number one with Hispanics. You saw that. Number one with Hispanics.
So, look, for our country to be great, we have to be able to make great deals. Were going to be great to the vets. Were going to be terrific. Our military is going to be unbelievable.
All of these things  were going to get rid of Obamacare and come up with something thats much better and much less expensive. Were going to get rid of it. Were going to repeal it. Its going to be out. Should have been out a long time ago. Should have never happened.
But we are going to take care of our country and we are going to bring back jobs and were going to bring back wealth to the United States so we can afford to save Social Security, which Ill save without cuts, so that we can afford to do the kind of things that we have to do to make America great again.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much. And here is your pledge.


Im going to tell you a story about Nashville. Youre not even going to believe it. But its a very personal story. Its a very special place to me for a very special reason.
But maybe more importantly, we have an incredible woman with us. Shes 92 years old. We dont talk about age but shes 92. And she looks magnificent. And her name is Beada and shes become very famous. You know who Beada is, right?
Beada, where are you Beada? Look at her. So beautiful.
So, she just registered to vote for the first time in her life. She hasnt seen anybody that really did it to her. And for the first time in her life she just registered to vote and shes going to vote for Trump. I think, right?
Thank you, darling. I really appreciate it. You know, shes become so famous. Shes on television all over the world now.
I have to be nervous even talking to her, youre so famous. Its great.
Beada, thank you very much. I really appreciate it and everybody appreciates it.
Because there is a big, big growing like leaps and bounds silent majority out there and were going to take this country back and were going to make this country so great again and so strong again.
Well, I just want to tell you about Nashville. So, years ago  many years ago  like I hate to say 40 but I wont say 40 but close to 40, I came to Nashville. Did you ever hear of a company called Genesco? Genesco. Right? So, they were based in Nashville, Tennessee, and they owned the Bonwit Teller department store chain.
And I was a young guy and I came from Brooklyn in Queens, and I wanted to go into Manhattan. And I went into Manhattan and I did the Grand Hyatt Hotel and I did some other things that were good.
But the thing I wanted more than anything was Fifth Avenue between 57th and 56th Street, which is called the Tiffany Location right next to Tiffany. And thats what I wanted. I wanted that piece of property so badly.
I shouldnt say that because youre not supposed to want things like that so badly. God will get angry at me, right?
But I wanted it so badly and the company that owned it was Genesco based in Nashville, Tennessee.
And I came in and I came to Nashville, and I met with the heads of Genesco who were really great people actually. And they were having a lot of difficulties. There were a lot of fighting and a lot of everything.
And I convinced them to sell me the land and the building. And I bought the Bonwit Teller store Fifth Avenue from 57th to 56th street surrounding Tiffany. I bought all the air rights and then ultimately I bought the air rights from Tiffany and I built Trump Tower. And to this day its one of the great buildings of the world and its one of the great successes.
And I love country music and I went to the Grand Ole Opry while I was here. And I just had such an incredible experience.
And when it came down to speaking because we could speak at a lot of places  you know, when youre leading in every poll, they sort of want you. When youre not leading in the polls, like so many of these guys, they dont want you at all.
And well talk about the polls in a second.
But I had a lot of choices for this morning, and I guess I could have also gone and played golf like the President does all the time, right? But I decided lets do this.
And I really chose Nashville because the experience is one of my  its not my biggest deal but in terms of a deal its so important and its been such a great  from the day I built it it was a home run. And it all really took place because of Nashville, Tennessee. So, I really  its an honor to be with you folks, I can tell you. Real honor.


So, coming over I heard and I watched television  you know, they have all these cameras back there and theyre live. And I guess were live on CNN, were live on so many different things. Its always difficult. You know, when youre always live, youve got to change up your speech. You cant make the speech over and over
The other candidates dont get covered live ever, except for the debate.
So you know, they had 24 million people on the debate. Now they think when the new numbers come out theyll be even substantially higher than that.
So I wouldve said they would have had a million or two. So I say they have 24 million people. And I say, well now the second debate, which is on CNN  that was on Fox, maybe I should ask for a lot of money and give the money to charity. Does that make sense? All to charity. All to charity.
When I said that to the writers at Time Magazine, they were nice enough to put me on the cover with actually a nice story. And I said, you know, and I sort of thought I said it off the record but they put it in Time Magazine. So now  maybe should I ask for charity, maybe a nice Nashville charity and American Cancer Society and AIDS research  so many of this  theres so many good  Alzheimers  you know, theres so many things going on. Maybe I should ask for a lot of money or Im not showing up.
You know, its interesting. So theyll get 2 million  a million to 2 million people at the debates. You know, theyve been doing them for a long time. They dont do great, especially the early Republican debate. Like you know the expression  it draws flies? Thats what it draws.
So this was one of the biggest shows in the history of cable television. I think it might have been the biggest in terms of political in the history of cable television.
Naturally I took full credit for it, which in all fairness I should. I should.
So bottom line I think I might ask for a lot of money for charity but you know. But I did say is it a little hokey if I do that? Maybe its not so nice. So what do you think? Should I do it or not? Maybe not. I dont know.
Heres the thing. If I dont do it, CNN just makes a lot of money. I dont care about CNN. Honestly. No, theyre going to make a lot of money. They just shut off their camera.
Theyre actually very nice.
But theyre going to make a lot of money and, you know, its something we should consider. So well all consider it together.
But coming over today, I saw that they were having the illegal immigrants come in and somebody mentioned the term the DREAMERs having to do with children and, you know, the dreams of children. And these are people who come over to the country and theyre DREAMERs.
And I said, "What about our children?" Why cant our children that are in the country, why cant they be the dreamers? Nobody ever talks about that. No, no, nobody ever talks about that.
You know, we talk about the DREAMERs, we talk about illegal immigrants, who by the way are treated better than our vets.
You know, our vets are incredible. No, no, the illegal immigrants in many casesare treated better than our veterans who are the greatest people we have  our wounded warriors are  these are the greatest people we have.
And another thing nice about being able to make speeches without having to hire some guy to write and keep writing and reading it and put a teleprompter then say, "Good morning ladies and gentlemen. Nashville, its wonderful  " you know, is that I can sort of be very current. Okay? I can be very, very current. I can talk about whats happening.
This morning on the television, they had a whole story about the Veterans Administration and the hospitals how people are waiting on lines to get in. These are our veterans. These are the people that got hurt fighting for us. Maybe we wouldnt be here if it wasnt for them, to be honest with you. I mean, thats possible too.
They had a story this morning on Fox, on CNN and a number of them where the veterans are just treated terribly and they showed a desk where theres supposed to be people behind this desk and they showed this desk and theres nobody there. And the veterans  I dont know, probably some of you saw it, the veterans are saying "Where are the people?"
And then, they said, "What happened?" And they said, "This happens all the time." There was not even  nobody even there! And two weeks ago on Wednesday, they had the longest wait in the history  in the history of the Veterans Administration for people wanting to see a doctor.
When I go to a doctor, if I have to wait like 9 minutes, Im like "Get me  " Id go crazy. Its true.
Remember the old days when the doctor used to come to your house? Right?


Beada remembers that. Youd have a cold. The doctor would come over carrying a little bag like this big, beautiful little bag, being at the top. And hed come over to your house, check you out, fine. Those days dont exist anymore.
You know, were in age of Obamacare where nothing exists.
By the way, we will repeal and replace Obamacare. That I can tell you. That I can tell you.
But, so two weeks ago Wednesday, the longest wait in the history of the Veterans Administration. So that if you go to the doctors office, men and women are waiting four days, three days, one was five days.
One case was five days or six days, finally got to see the doctor and the doctor excused himself because he was going on vacation.
Now, you think about that. Can you imagine waiting even a day or a half a day? But these people are waiting four, five days.
So the waits now the longest in history and thats the way were treating our greatest people and thats not right and were going to change that. Were going to change that.
We have right now  and people dont know this. You know, they see these phony statistics put out by politicians basically. All talk, no action politicians. And I mean on both sides in all fairness.
You know, Im a Republican. Im a conservative. But Im just as angry with the Republicans because they go to Washington, something happens  they become weak. You know, they go to Washington  "Were going to stop Obamacare. Were going to stop this. Were going to do this. Were going to do that."
Then they walk into these magnificent buildings with those incredible vaulted ceilings, and they go "Oh, I made it, darling, I made it. I vote for you. I vote for you. I vote for Obamacare expansions. Ill do whatever you want me to do. Im in Washington."
Its amazing. Isnt it amazing? Dont you agree?
I wont happen to me, I promise.
And if it does, you can let me know about it. But it wont. I promise. I promise.
But you know, they show those phony statistics where were 5.4% unemployment. 5.4%. The real number. You know, I actually saw a number it could be 42%, okay, believe it or not.
But when you think about it, we have 93 million people that are right now out of the labor force. 93 million people. Of the 93 many of these people want jobs. And they quit looking.
So if youre looking for a job and you cant find it and you stop for a while  you know, after a while you sort of like "Its not happening. Its not going to happen." I dont know what they do. But they stop. They are considered statistically employed. Okay?
So, we have 93 million people out of the labor force. I mean, think about it. Its hard to believe.
We have 50 million people in poverty. These are very new numbers. 50 million people in poverty. Taking our money.
Japans taking our money.
Mexico is beating us at the border and on trade. By the way, theyre killing us on trade. You know that.
In fact, you just lost a big car plant to Mexico in Tennessee. Remember? Recently front page Wall Street Journal. A plant that you were going to have
[Comment on a supporters sign]
You know this is a movement, folks. This is not like maybe even about me. I dont want it to be about me. This is about common sense. Its about doing the right thing.
One of the things that came out in the poll, which was really amazing. Some of the polls, I mean, hey, in Iowa, were leading big. Those are great people. We just left Iowa. We had such an amazing evening. 4,000 people in a room that never had that many people and it was a happening.
We just left Alabama, which was unbelievable. 31,000 people in a stadium, and it was supposed to pour. And it did. It poured the minute my speech  thats like luck. Thats from God. The minute the speech was over, we got it and it poured. We had 31,000 people and it was the most unbelievable.
And the poll just came out in Alabama, leading big in Alabama. Leading big in Iowa. Leading tremendously big in New Hampshire. Great people. Leading really big in New Hampshire.
Leading big in Florida. How about Florida? I have a governor. We have a low energy governor and we have a Senator and were leading big in Florida. How do you do that when you have a Senator whos sitting, you have a governor whos been there for eight years and Trump  ? I love Florida and Im there a lot. What could be in Florida? Great weather. You have great weather but Florida has great weather. Big advantage.


But you know, Im leading big in Florida.
But one of the polls came out because in South Carolina and North Carolina, Im leading really big.
And in South Carolina, a poll came out and we had a statement that my level of popularity or favorability  you know, Im the only one that can get a poll and it comes out and these guys in the back with all those red lights on will say  I think I had one poll where Im 41%  almost 41%  can you imagine? 41%. Theres 17 people. So Im at 41% with 17 people and they said "Trumps at 41% but look"  you cant even hear it. You know, "Trump says bleh". Nobody knows what they just said.
"But there are some people that dont like him."
Its unbelievable. Im the only one that wins these polls and I get negative publicity. No, its incredible. The press, ayeyayay.
Well, yesterday, you might have seen me. I was in South Carolina. I made a speech. I had to bring it up.
The New York Times to me is a big deal. You know, Im from New York. Very liberal paper but thats okay. You know, not everybody could be like us. But its still the New York Times. Right? We have to admit, still the New York Times.
And Im on the front page a lot on the New York Times, and to be on the front page of the New York Times is a big deal.
But yesterday or two days ago, they had story about me and they had some low level Hispanic commentator. Low level guy. This one didnt like me.
By the way, I think Im going to win the Hispanic vote and I think  you know, in Nevada, I won the Hispanic poll. They love me.
I love the Hispanic people. Incredible energy. Incredible people. I love the people. I have so many  I have thousands that work for me and thousands and thousands over the years and have worked for me. Theyre great people.
And I said, "Im going to win". And a lot of the Hispanics that are here legally, they dont want people coming in illegally. You know its true. Its true.
So theres this poll that comes out. I think it was in South Carolina where were way up and Lindsey at 4% and hes the Senator. Im at 30%. So I wrote him a note, "Congratulations. Im only beating you in your home state by 26 points."
So anyways, who cares.
But they did something that nobody reported. They say, "Oh but do people like Trump?" By the way, this election is not going to be like.
I think Im a nice person. I love people. I want to help people.
Womens health issues to me are very important. To Jeb Bush it wasnt important because he didnt want to fund them. And then he said, "Oh, I misspoke."
But you know, I really want to be a nice person and I am a nice person.
But I think its actually going to be an election based on competence. Were tired of being like the patsy for everybody. I really do. I think its time.
But in the poll, this was the Monmouth poll. Big poll. Highly re  "In another act of political magicTrump managed to flip his favorability rating from negative"  nobody wrote this by the way. Nobody said it. Nobody reported it. "From negative to positive."
This is an exact quote. I have like this photographic memory so I dont need  but I want to be sure because if I used the word "the" incorrectly, theyll say, "He didnt  "
"Favorability rating from negative to positive in one poll during the span of a month". A feat that Monmouth Universitys Patrick Murrays highly respected pollster called "astounding".
Called it "astounding." Nobody else wrote about it.
"That defies any rule in presidential politics that Ive ever seen," said this highly respected man.
Murray, the director of the polling institute, said he flipped it from 20% to 52% in one month and he said that hes never seen that before.
And you know what? Thats because people have heard me and they say "Youre such a nice person." No, they want  they say hes a man  Ive made a tremendous amount of money. Ive had tremendous success. And I dont say that braggingly. Thats the kind of thinking we need in the country. I mean, whatever it is.
But to me, that statement was more important than actually literally killing everybody in the poll. We were much, much higher, more than double everybody.
And we are more than double everybody.


You saw the Quinnipiac just came out and that was an amazing poll. I was the same thing. Much, much higher  double and triple and quadruple many of these candidates.
And the reason is people in this country are smart. They dont believe a lot of what they see in the media because if you believe these people  you know, why are they doing this? I mean, why are they even saying it?
Youd think that if somebodys good for the country  and Ill be great for the country because Im going to make great deals for our country. We dont win anymore. Our country doesnt win anymore.
Youd think somebody  even a liberal person or a Democrat liberal and I mean, really liberal. Somebody whos going to make the country  why are they knocking it? Why are they knocking? Why do they fight?
Youd think theyd say "Lets do it. Its good. Its good for all of us."
Because our country is in trouble. We owe now $19 trillion. You know, Ive been saying $18 [trillion] for a while now. But now it starts to go up quickly.
And by the way, when Obamacare kicks in, which is really kicking in in 16, you want to see bad deficits? You want to see it go up? Youre going to really see it go up because that has a huge negative impact not only on jobs but on the deficit itself because of the costs. And its no good.
Have you noticed  and youve seen it yourself  the premiums have gone through the roof? Right? The deductibility  unless youre close to death, youre never going to use it. You cant use it because the deductibility is so high.
But the premiums are up 30%, 40%, and 50% and more. Its a disaster.
And on top of that, its going to cost the country a fortune. So its not only costing you a lot of money, its going to cost the country a fortune.
So we have to do something about it. And we have to do something importantly about it.
But when I see the people on television and I have to tell you I wont mention names, some of them when they hear my name  I was talking  we have a great reporter today from the Wall Street Journal with us. Okay? Who came down. And she actually said "Some of them when they hear your name it looks like theyre a boiler waiting to explode." Its true.
Now, number one, they look bad because they said  do you remember the beginning? Like three, four months ago. They said, "Hes a clown. Hes a clown. Just having fun."
You know, I went to a great school. I did great. I did  everything was great. I came out. I made a fortune, which I want to use the brain for you, but I made a fortune.
I then did a book called The Art of the Deal and many bestsellers. The Art of the Deal being probably the best selling business book of all time. Who has read The Art of the Deal? Yeah, most people. Most everybody.
I jokingly say but I mean it  the Bible tops it by a long way. I say that. I say that. Said it the first time in Iowa. People liked that. But its true. Nothing tops the Bible.
But the Art of the Deal  great success. Many books  bestsellers. Many, many bestsellers.
Then I do The Apprentice. Ive never done television. I do The Apprentice. Its one of the most successful shows ever on television by the way.
And NBC renewed the Apprentice. You know that. Right? For me.
They came up to my office, the head of Comcast  great guy  I wont use names. Just say "Steve". No, honestly hes a great guy. One of the best in the country. He came up with the heads of NBC six months ago and they said, "Donald, were renewing The Apprentice. Please, youll have to do  you have to do it."
I said, "Honestly, Steve, Im running for President. I want to make our country great again. I want to make -"
And they didnt believe me. And I said it four times. They didnt believe me. Nobody believed that I was going to run. Nobody.
My wife didnt even believe me, but now she does. But she actually said "If you actually say youre going to run, youre going to do great because people like you." She actually said "Theyd love you" but I dont want to brag. But she said, "If you actually run  not you may run, you may not run, who knows?" But she said "If you actually say -"
So the NBC guys come up  terrific people. I mean, honestly I had a great relationship with NBC for 12 years. We had many, many, you know number ones and The Apprentice continues to do great. You know, last season you know how well it did. So they wanted to renew it for many, many shows.
In fact, Mark Burnett called up. You know Mark Burnett. He did Survivor, Apprentice. So Mark Burnett, whos a great guy, he calls up and he goes "I dont believe it. Youre not taking a renewal." The word is renewal. I said, "Thats right, Mark. Im going to run for President." "No, no, no, you have to  nobody doesnt take a renewal. Its unheard of in primetime television. Two hours primetime. Are you crazy?" I said, "Mark, I have to do this. Ive done so well in this country. I have to do it."


We can save our country. We can save our country.
So anyways, the bottom line, NBC renewed it. I told them Im not doing it, and then they finally believed me when I actually announced.
They dont like me anymore. Its amazing. They do not like me.
But its too bad. Too bad. Well, thank you.
You know, the funny thing about The Apprentice  there have been 15 copies of The Apprentice. Every single one of them failed. So then a reporter said to me, "Why do you think that is?" I said "Because Im special." And I was kidding. I was doing it sarcastically  I mean, I sort of meant it to be honest, right? But I was sort of kidding. And they wrote it and I hated the way it looked in writing. You know, it sounds good when you say it but oh it looks so bad in writing.
But so I had a great experience. So here I am  great schools, great brain, great success, built a great company, do The Apprentice, tremendous success. When I did The Apprentice, a certain critic said "It will never be successful" because you know to have a big hit  a really a number one hit  you have to  and you remember that first season it had one of the highest ratings ever. The finale of The Apprentice? Aye! Remember with the great Bill Rancic. Remember how that was? Incredible. But to have a great success, you have to have women.
And Ill never forget  I saved the article. Right? Like Harry Truman saved it where it said, "Truman loses" and he actually won. Remember? But I saved this article. They said "Trump can never succeed on television because why would women want to watch Donald Trump?" And I said, "Am I so bad? Am I so bad?" Tell me, am I so bad?
And it turned out that women were the biggest base. I mean, those were the ones that likedSo you know I saved those things.
But no matter how you cut it, we can do something so incredible. And honestly, its going to be hard. Its going to be a lot of work. Its going to be a lot of time. I wouldnt leave the White House. You know, Obama always leaves the White House. Think of it. Youre elected President. Youre in the White House. Why would you want to leave? I think Id maybe never leave! How cool is that?
He leaves to go to some place and go fundraisers. Ill try  I dont know maybe theres some rules against it. So maybe I cant. But Ill do the fundraisers in the White House.
He and his wife left  I think one was doing the Ellen show another was doing another show right next door in Burbank, California. They left a couple of hours difference. One took Air Force One; one took a beautiful Boeing 757. Two planes. A little bit different timing going to the same location, going to the same airport to do different shows.
And I say why? Why arent they flying at least the same plane?
Now, I know what those suckers cost because I happen to have one of them right? So I know what it costs to operate these planesMore importantly, the time and the energy. But I would have said Ellen or I would have said whoever was doing the show, "Lets do it from the White House." This way, I take a half and hour, I go back, I dont spend any money of the taxpayers.
And you know the funny thing is that whoever the host is would like it better. "Were doing our show live from the White House or something".
So we dont pay any money. We dont have to fuel up Air Force One, which costs you  do you ever see what it costs to travel in these things? With hundreds and hundreds of security and youre closing down Burbank, California.
I mean, every time Obama comes to Manhattan to do a fundraiser, which is often, I say "Whats going on? You cant move. They closed down all the streets. They closed down the city."
And he could do it from like Washington. In fact, he could do it in my new hotel that Im buying which is only a couple of blocks.
Its true. Im building this incredible hotel on Pennsylvania Avenue and its going to be incredible. The Old Post Office. And I actually got it from the Obama administration, which is hard to believe. People say "Whats going on? How did Trump get it?"
One of the most heavily sought after buildings in the history of the General Services Administration, which owned it. You know, theyre the ones that made the decision. And I got it and were building this phenomenal hotel  Trump International Hotel  right on Pennsylvania Avenue directly between Congress and the White House. Right? Its going to open just in time  and by the way, listen to this one. Were under budget and ahead of schedule. Do you ever hear that from government? Way under budget.
So were actually going to be opening and itll be great. But he can use my hotel. Ill let him use it free. You just come in, use it, go back to the White House. But you dont have to do that.
But youd say to yourself why  you know, its a mindset. But more importantly even in the travel, we have so many things that we have to do to straighten out our country. You dont want to waste time. Youve got to do this. Youve got to make deals.


Ive got the greatest deal makers in the world lined up to make deals for us. Carl Icahn  incredible guy. Right? Incredible guy. Great deal maker.
Ive got some of the greatest deal makers in the world. Theyre all calling me too. They said "You didnt ask me."
I have these guys calling me up  the best in the world.
Now, I know the best. I also know guys that are overrated. I know guys that you havent heard of that honestly are phenomenal. I know a lot that you have heard of that arent really that good, that are overrated in my opinion.
But theyre the best in the world. And theyre calling me. They dont want money. Theyre worth billions of dollars.
But when I put, lets say, Carl Icahn and Ill say "Carl, do me a favor. Handle China." Were going to make a great deal. No, no, were going to make a great deal because thats what happens. You know, thats what happens.
So, were going to take back our trade.
If you look at China, if you look at Japan  I was in Los Angeles a few weeks ago. I saw ships  the biggest ships Ive ever seen with cars pouring our, pouring out one after another, made in Japan, very nice. Everythings nice. Except that it doesnt help us. When does it help us? When does it help us?
We sell them beef. Beef. And then they dont want it. Because you know, do you ever see whats going on over there? We sell the beef and it goes over there and its very perishable. So by the time it gets over there, then they turn it over "We dont want it."
They have cars coming from these massive, massive ships. Massive. And they just pour off the ships.
And I say, "What are we doing? How stupid are we? No tax, no nothing."
And Im a free trader. I believe in free trade. I have to say. But I have to be fair trade.
When you look at Japan, they take in money up here and we give them money down here. We get nothing by comparison. Its like peanuts.
Balance it out, fellows. Balance it out. Got to balance it.
A friend of mine is a great manufacturer. As you know, China has  its probably the greatest theft in the history of the United States what China has done to us. Theyve taken our money. Theyve taken our jobs. Theyve taken everything. Theyve taken so much.
And theyre creating a bubble and you know interestingly were so intertwined that now the bubble could take us down if it explodes, which at some point it might.
And weve got to be smart.
I made so much money dealing with China. I made hundreds of millions, probably billions, dealing with China.
The Bank of America building in San Francisco  I own a big chunk of that, which nobody knows. Nobody knows.
You know, all these guys come to Forbes. "Oh, Trumps worth only $5 billion or $4 billion." Or whatever. "Hes only worth $5 billion." Its like a bankrupt magazineThey dont even know my numbers. They said, "Well, we havent been able to look at about 400 of his companies."
So I filed. Interestingly, they said "Hell never run. Hell never run."
Then I announced. Then they said, "Oh, hell never file his form whatever." Thats a single page where basically youre signing your life away and it has to be done within 14 days of the announcement.
I signed my form. And they said, "Well, hell never ever put in his financials." And you have like 90 days or something. And they said, "Hell ask for extensions but hell never show because hes probably not as rich as people think."
But actually Im much richer and I put in my financials  its true. Its true.
And Forbes and another group said, "No, no, we dont know what these companies are."
I put in these massive financials, and you know, I was so proud. I might have filed if I wasnt going to run. I wanted to show people. I wanted to brag. Its such a great company Ive built.
So they said, "Hell never put in his financials." I put in the financials. And everybody  theyre much bigger. Its a much bigger  you know, very little debt, tremendous value. And really great assets. Iconic assets. You know, iconic. Doral, Turnberry in Scotland. I mean, I have some of the greatest real estates in the world. And Im very proud of it.
But they say, "Hell never file. Hell never file."
Then they see all these companies. And you know, they have boxes. And because it wasnt really meant for somebody like me, and they have these little boxes. They say, "Is it worth or does he make $1 million, from $1 million to $5 million, from $5 million to $10 million, from $10 million to $20 million?" The last box is $50 million or more. $50 million or more.
So like I have a lot of buildings that are worth much more than that. I have a lot of assets that are worth much more than that.
So it says "$50 million or more". So I checked many of them. I dont know how many. I think theres 23 of them. Can you believe it? So I checked like, I dont know, I think its 23. I could be wrong. Oh, theyll kill me if Im wrong. But Im not sure. But I think its like 23 boxes. $50 million or more.
So you know when some of these guys do to try and always marginalize you? They added up 23 50s. Now, some of the 50s are worth a billion. Some of them are worth more than a billion.


So it says "$50 million or more", I go 50. So theyll take $50 million for a building that might be worth a billion and honestly much more.
And they add them up and they say "Well, hes worth $2.9 billion." Its really  this is the press. And they have no clue. Those statements arent really meant for me  its not meant for a guy like me.
But with all of that the statements were so good. Theyre so good. Theyre so good.
And you know, one of the things Im doing and last night was incredible. We had an amazing event in Massachusetts. Right? Oh, look at this, we have a wit- what the hell are you doing in Nashville? What are you doing?
Anyway, so here I am. I spent millions of dollars during the course on jet fuel. Okay? Like a lot of money on jets.
But somebody puts up a sign $100 to go to this thing. I didnt know who did it. But somebody puts up a sign.
So all over the place, Im spending millions of dollars. Im turning down millions. I dont want your money. I dont want your money.
Somebody puts a sign up talking about $100 contribution, which you didnt have to make. But they put it up. Its all over CNN. "Trump is asking for $100."
I fly my plane some place it costs me a fortune. The fuel. The $100. The money that I raised last night, which says it all it goes towards paying off like the expense or something. The guy that had it is a great guy  Ernie. A great guy. Really successful guy. You know him, right? Ernie. Hell sell you a car any day of the week, right?
And you know the guy is  like 2,000 people showed up. Let him get a little deferment of the roast beef or whatever the hell theyre serving.
So they put up a sign. I dont want the money. I might like $4 or $5 million. Thats hard to turn down. But the hundred dollars times some people and we let the vets there, we let most of the people I think came in free. And I end up with this big story  "Trump accepting contributions".
I cant believe it. I got so angry at my people. Because somebody put up a sign saying $100. And honestly, first of all, its like peanuts. It doesnt mean anything. But they used to it to try and marginalize. They always do. They always do.
The bottom line is I am self-funding my campaign. Im self-funding. I dont want to have anybody giving. I dont need money. Now, with that being said, the small money comes in and its not a lot of money but its great money. Like Beada might send me some money. Beada will send me some money.
But a woman sent me $7 with a beautiful letter from Georgia. Another person sent me $12. Small money. And some sent me $1,000. But it doesnt amount to a lot. But that I do like coming in because they invest in the campaign.
How do I take the $7 check, right, and send it back to the person who sent it to me from Georgia? "Dear So and So, Im sorry I dont really want your money." How do you write a letter like that?
I want them to invest in it. You know, but theyre not going to tell me not to do this or not to do that for China because they are lobbyists for China and they gave me $5 million.
I had a big lobbyist asked me to have  he wanted to give me $5 million for my campaign. I turned him down. I turned him down.
And then I see this story on CNN last night. It was disgusting. That look theres a sign  $100! Somebody does a sign. It actually was a beautiful sign if you want to know the truth. It was so beautiful. It was beautifully done. And theyre doing this big thing about all day long last night about  I said we had this incredible event and they destroyed it by trying to marginalize. And thats the press. Thats the media.
Yeah, the criminal media. I mean, theres truth to it. No, because a lot of times they know its wrong.
But I just want to tell you so important to me and last night it was such an incredible event. It had to be a record for a house. The guy got a beautiful house, got a big lawn, put up a tent. But we had 2,000 people. It had to be a record.
The spirit in that group, the spirit in Alabama, the spirit was so incredible. The spirit in our last meeting in Iowa. Dont forget.
When I went to Iowa and you know what I love? Im leading with Tea Party. Big. I love Tea Party. I love the Tea Party. Tea Party people, stand up and take a bow. You have not been treated fairly. No, you havent been treated fairly.
You have not been treated fairly.


You know, people talk about the Tea Party and you talk about marginalizing, at least I have a microphone where I can fight back. You people dont.
The Tea Party people are incredible people. These are people that work hard and they love the country and then they just get beat up all the time by the media. Its disgusting.
And you will be surprised how big you are. You dont know how big you are. You dont know the power that you have. I mean it. You dont know the power that you have.
The Tea Party and you can call it anything that you want. I dont care about names. But the Tea Party has tremendous power.
I talked silent majority. But the silent majority is more than Tea Party. Its Democrats. Its poor people. Its rich people. Its everybody. Its evangelicals.
One of the things that made me so happy  Im a protestant. Im a presbyterian. Right?  is that I had a recent poll and they did a beautiful  like these polls are great. You know, guys like Jeb Bush and Hillary, they hire pollsters. They pay them hundreds of thousands of dollars. What do you have to do that for? Every week they come out with a new poll. Right?
Hey, Im rich. I could hire a hundred poll. I dont want to waste money. You know, why should I pay?
I know in one caselike $150,000 a month. And you know, then theyre arrogant guys. They think theyre hot stuff and they tell the candidates what to say. "Youve got to say this. Youve got to be politically correct."
No way. I dont have time to be political. No, its true. Its true.
I dont have time to be political. You know, it takes a lot of time to be politically correct.
You saw the anchor baby thing. Did you see that with where Im on? And somebody fromits the same network  CNN again  he said, "You know the name anchor baby is very insulting?" I said, "What would you call it?" And he gave me like nine words. "A baby of illegal immigrant who was brought to the country to this and that." I said, "How can I say that? Its too long."
Its anchor baby.
And then Bush  Jeb. Jeb Bush gets caught because he is such a nice person. Honestly.
If you want a nice person, honestly you should vote for Jeb. The country is going to go to hell but we wont talk of that. No, no, but if you want a nice person.
So Jeb has a memo that he signed of basically a politically correct memo. You know, dont say this, dont say that. All these things. Pages of stuff.
But one of the things  "Never use the term anchor baby."
So all of a sudden, hes using the term anchor baby just last week.
And with me, when I use it nobody criticizes me. They expect me. They gave up. Okay?
With him, they killed him. They just killed him. It didnt stop.
And then he blamed it on the Asians. He said, you know  did you see that? And then the New York Times did an editorial "How dare you attack the Asians?"
So he wanted to steer away from the Hispanics. He said, "Well, you know, the Asians come in and they also have anchor babies." And now the Asians all hate him. Its true.
But the Asians love me and I love them. I love them.
So he has a memo and he signs the memo and it says  a couple of years ago  "Dont use this term", and now hes using it because he has to.
Because baby  you know, think of it. Think of it. I want to build a wall. Okay? So easy. So easy. When this clown  Jose Reyes or whatever the hell his name  no, hes a baseball player. Ramos. Actually Jose Reyes is a baseball player. Hes a nice baseball player. But when Ramos got up the other day screaming and ranting and going crazy and I had all these reporters. Actually, the reporters were mostly on my side because they all had their hand up but this guy starts screaming.
So I even had liberal people from CBS  I actually said to the CBS guy "Yes?" and this guy stands up and starts screaming.
So when he  and I actually got a lot of credit for the way we handled him. I didnt do anything like  I didnt do anything. Except for the Times. And thats what I alluded to before. The Times said, "Donald Trump railed at him and screamed at him." I didnt scream at him. But he was screaming at me.
And much worse than that, they said I wore a toupee. Can you believe it? I dont wear a toupee, and I proved it  I wont bring anybody up. I wont bring anybody up. But I dont.
But think of it. Im in the front page of the New York Times and in the first sentence in the first paragraph has this announcer  this Hispanic announcer that nobody ever heard of  saying they called him something which means he wears a toupee. And I dont.


So, Im on the front page of the New York Times. I cant even talk about it. Im embarrassed to talk about it.
But they also said, I was essentially screaming at this guy from Univision, who I happen to be suing for $500 million. They didnt mention that.
They also didnt mention that his daughter works for Hillary Clinton. Did you know that? His daughter works for Hillary Clinton. Oh, you didnt know that. Oh. No, they didnt mention that. No, no.
They said I was wearing a toupee and I was screaming but they didnt. No, hes screaming at me.
So we very nicely  and then we let him come back and we actually had a nice talk. He actually seemed like a nice guy after he calmed down a little bit. You know, hes a very emotional man.
But, he said, "You cant build a wall because you cant do it."
So, 2,000 years ago in China  we always get back to China  2,000 years ago, the Great Wall of China  oh, wed like to have a wall. This is a serious wall. Okay? This is a wall you dont go through so easy.
They built a wall 2,000 years ago thats 13,000 miles. Think of that. Thats a big wall. Thats serious wall, right? This was 2,000 years ago. I mean, it took them like 500 years to build it so you know, I got to be a little bit  you know, took a long time. But 13,000 miles thats a long time. They had no tractors. They didnt have Caterpillars.
Of course, today, we use Komatsus because theyre made in Japan and you could buy them cheaper. How stupid is that? Because they devalued the yen so much and people are buying Komatsus instead of Caterpillars. Caterpillars stock is down. Its terrible. Well change that around. Believe me. Believe me.
But, they build this wall. Now, we have really 15  I would say  look we have 2,000 miles as opposed to 13,000. But you dont need it on all of it because some you have natural landscaping, some you have a lot of places.
And actually 10 years ago, everybody wanted the wall built. Hillary wanted it built. But they couldnt.
Because Im a great builder. What I do best is build. Im not a rendering guy. I do the building and then do the rendering. A lot of these guys come in with renderings and it never gets built. Does that make sense to anybody? Im the opposite. I get it built.
So, one of the reasons it couldnt get built is because they couldnt get an approved environmental impact study. Do you believe this? No, no, they had certain snail doggers and different things. They couldnt get it. They could not get an environmental impact study approved to build a wall.
And theyre killing people. We have illegal immigrants. You see that with Kate in San Francisco. You see it with Jamiel. You see it with so many people.
Last night in Massachusetts I met some unbelievable families that have been devastated by illegal immigrants. They come into this country and kill members of their family.
Last week in California, a 66-year-old veteran  a female, a veteran, 66  got raped, sodomized, tortured, and killed. Raped, sodomized, tortured, and killed. 66-years-old. By an illegal immigrant that they caught, that they caught luckily.
But this is what we have. We have stupid people in our government and we have people pouring across the border. And you know what? We have great border patrol people. I went there. You probably saw that. Thats why the hat is so successful. The white one, right?
But I went there, everybody wants to buy the hat. Now they like the white one. Then two weeks later, I wore the red one. The white one didnt sell so well. The red one sells. Crazy thing.
But I went to the border and I got to know the people and I saw people, and you know its rough stuff, its rough stuff.
And when I first came in and when I first did my opening statement that I was running for President, I talked about illegal immigration. I was killed by the press.
Rush Limbaugh, who I think is a terrific guy, said "Trump has received more incoming than any human being Ive ever seen. Then he goes and has a news conference and I think hes going to apologize and he doubles down."
I got credit. I got credit.
No, they thought I was going to apologize. And I dont mind apologizing but I have to make a mistake to apologize and I was right. No, I was right.
So for two weeks, as Rush said, I took incomingIn fact that was my first two weeks. I said "Is it going to be like this for the next year and a half?" I dont know if I can make it. It was brutal.
Now, many of those people that talked that way, many of those people, theyve apologized to me. Everybody says Im right. And only because of me is everybody talking about illegal immigration. They wouldnt even be talking about it. They wouldnt even be talking about it.


And were going to build a wall and were going to get, you know, the gang members in Baltimore and in Chicago and these are some tough dudes. Theyre going to be out so fast.
One of the first thing Im going to do is get rid of those gang members. Were going to be  you know, you look at whats going on with Baltimore, you look at whats going on in Chicago and Ferguson and St. Louis the other night. We are going to get rid of those gang members so fast your head will spin.
You know, we can be very tough. I just met your cops outside. Those police are tough cookies. Those guys  we need law and order. We need law and order.
I mean, they allowed  in one night, that first night in Baltimore  they allowed that city to be destroyed. And they set it back 35 years. One night. Because the police were not allowed to protect people. They werent allowed to protect people.
We have incredible law enforcement in this country and we have to be  the head of the police in Chicago is a person I know. Originally from New York. Hes a phenomenal guy. He can stop things if theyre allowed to stop them. He can stop it. Believe me.
We have some incredible people. But we have to be tough. We have to be smart.
You know, I know youre going to have some bad apples. Youre going to have problems. I see some of the things. You did too and its disgusting and its horrible. But thats such a tiny percentage.
The problem is the good work doesnt get shown on television. All of the good work, which is 99.9%.
I mean, the good work with the police. Its 99.9%. That one little thing.
And its horrible. I agree. I hated some of the things. I dont have to go into them. But you know the same ones because you were sick when you looked at some of them just like I was.
But we need law and order. We need our police. Theyre great people. They do a phenomenal job. Theyre right now afraid of doing anything. Theyre afraid.
I mean, I know cities. I wont mention names but I know cities where police are afraid to even talk to people because they want to be able to retire and have their pension; they dont want to be thrown off the police force.
And then you wonder why theres crimes in our cities.
So we need a whole new mindset. We have to build up our military. We have to make our military so strong. We have to make our military so powerful and so strong that we never have to use it. We never have to use it.
We also have to focus on what we have  look, Ukraine. I want Ukraine to be healthy, vibrant and good. But Ukraine is near Germany and all of these European countries. Were now sending F-22s. Thats the newest fighters. The best in the world. Were sending fighters every  Wheres Germany? Where are all these European countries? It affects them. It affects them. And we want to stand alongside of them. I agree.
But why are we leading the fight? Putin hates us. He hates Obama. He doesnt hate us. I think hed like me. Id get along great with him I think if you want to know the truth. No, he has no respect for our President and our President doesnt like him in all fairness. They dont have good chemistry to put it mildly, would you say. But Id get along with these people.
Think of it. Every country is ripping us off. Even Russia is ripping us off because in the Iran deal, which is going to go down as one of the worst deals ever, Russia is a big beneficiary because theyre going to sell Iran missiles with the money we give to Iran. Think of that.
So one of the biggest beneficiaries is Russia. Okay?
But think of it. So, Ukraine  lets take a few of these things and then Im getting the hell out of here; Im going back to New York. Do you mind? Maybe Ill go to the Grand Ole Opry tonight. Can I do that?
Id actually rather  I love  by the way, this is not a politician speaking. Believe me. I hope. I love country music. I love it. Hey, Trace Adkins  right? And who else won on The Apprentice? Who else? John Rich. My kids love those two guys. John Rich. And who else? Who did really well? Clint Black. Right? Clint Black. He did great. And my Trace  how good is Trace, okay?
You know, Trace came onto The Apprentice. And I said, "Who the hell is he? Who is he?" I didnt know who Trace was. Id never heard of him. And he wasnt a big name. And he came on  just to show you how important this show is and his record or album or whatever you call it nowit went to number one. And then he came to me the next yearbut Trace came to me and he goes  you know, at certain awards show, I wont mention the name  but he said "Last year, I couldnt get into the show and this year Im hosting it, Mr. Trump, all because of you."
Nice, right? I know, nice.
But those three guys, theyre great and theyre just fantastic people.
But weve got to make our country so strong. We have to make our country rich again.
A person came up and said, "Oh, thats not nice." Whats not nice? They said rich, you know, to say were going to make our country rich.


We cant make our country great if were going to be poor. Were a debtor nation. We owe $19 trillion.
China  think of this  China we owe $1.4 trillion to. So they come in, they take our jobs, they take our money, they take our base, they take our manufacturing and we owe them $1.4 trillion. How do you do that? Thats like a magic act. Right? Its true.
Japan sells us cars by the millions. They make a fortune. They come in, they sell us cars by the millions. And we owe them the exact same amount. We owe them $1.4 trillion. How come if theyre selling us cars we owe them money? Think of it. Put on your business. See? I have a natural instinct for this stuff. Right? You know? Right?
If we buy all these cars, why do we owe them money? But we owe them because they take all our money that they make and they buy our bonds. And were paying interests on them and we owe them money.
So, itll change. It can change. Its not even going to be hard.
People dont realize. See, Obama never read the Art of the Deal. People dont realize.
Oh, and somebody said Sharon. It was Sharon. Wheres Sharon? She gave me such a hard time. Wheres Sharon? Where the hell is she? You could have both Sharons stand up actually. Where are they? Both of them. Sharon is great. Oh, did they go after herShe took a lot of incoming. Sharon, did you take a lot of incoming? I think so. Right? Thank you, darling.
So, we are going to do something that if I get elected  and again they said Ill never run and nowOne guy said  John McLaughlin  you ever watch the McLaughlin Report? I like him.
And one of the people on the little group said Donald Trump is a great businessman but hell never make it as a President. Hell never get elected. Hell never make it. And John McLaughlin  this crusty guy who I like; I dont know him. I never met him, I dont think. But I like. Hes sitting there and he goes  and he got angry  he goes "Why wouldnt he make it? You tell me why. Hes been a tremendous success in everything hes done. I go all over the world. I see him name. I see his name all over. Hes a great success."
And he said  I think this is the word  "Hes a man of great achievement. Why wouldnt he make it?"
And I thought it was so nice and the other guy just sort of shut up. You know, because you need somebody of great achievement.
You need  Ive produced tens of thousands of jobs over the year. I dont have to worry about Obamacare. I take such good care of my employees. I have thousands of employees. I take good care of them. We have great plans. My employees are lucky. They hit the lotto, okay? But I take great care  education and health care  and my people are very happy.
But Ive done this for a long time, and Ive seen ups and downs. Ive seen market crashes. Ive seen friends of mine go bankrupt. Youve never seen  Ive never gone bankrupt. By the way, Ive used the laws to my advantage and companies.
I buy a company. I throw it into a chapter. I negotiate with banks. I kill. You know. And then they say "Trump goes bankrupt." These people  they dont have any 


Now, when other people do that, when a Carl does it  I mean, they do it all the time. They use it all the time. Its called using your head. Its called using the laws.
Actually I did a good job didnt I at the debate when Chris Matthews so angrily said  I do what every other great businessman does.
I buy a company  you know, its one company was sort of interesting. A friend of mine had it. Good guy. And the banks were just killing him. They were mean. And banks can be mean, right?
Youve got to teach them how to behave, right?
So this guy was just getting beaten. And I did him a favor and I called up the banks. And I said "Do me this, do this, do this, do that." They said, "We wont do that. No, we wont do that."
I said, "Youre making a mistake." Anyways, its sort of a little bit complicatedI bought it. Immediately, I called them back and said, "Dont do this." I threw it into a chapter. And they come out with the story "Trump files bankruptcy". Can you believe it? I negotiated it to hell. What I did to that bank  ayeyeye.
They see me walking down the street and they go "Hey, hey, hey." But then Im good at that stuff, you know? Im really good at that stuff.
But you have to use the laws to your advantage. No, no, you have to use it to your advantage.
Atlantic City. You know, you look at Atlantic City. Caesars went bankrupt. Whoever heard of Caesars? Caesars filed Chapter 11. Nobody cares. Everybody in Atlantic City. I had the good sense seven years ago and actually the financial media gives me great credit because I have a vision for things.
I said, "Dont go into Iraq" even though Im a very militaristic person. I said "Dont go into Iraq" and they shouldnt have because I said youre going to destabilize the Middle East. So what did we get  $2 trillion. Thousands of deaths. Thousands. Like 5,000. Wounded warriors who I love all over the place.
We cant even go there. Iran is taking over Iraq. With the money that were giving them, theyre going to take off and theyre going to get the oil, theyre going to get everything. The oil they dont get ISIS is getting. What do we get? Nothing. We get nothing. We got far less than nothing.
So I had vision in 2004  Reuters  actually it was before that but they wrote a story. Trump says dont do Iraq.
Now, Im much more militaristic than Bush, even the brother. But you got to know where to use it and when. You got to use.
So with Atlantic City, seven years ago, I got out. Thats called vision. I should get credit for vision.
And again, this isnt bragging. Normally, I wouldnt say this but I need your fricking votes. Do you understand that? Do you understand that?
I mean, normally I wouldnt. So I got great credit. I got out.
But most of the places in Atlantic City are either in trouble or theyre bankrupt. They went bankrupt.
But I made a lot of money in Atlantic City. I had a great time in Atlantic City but they asked me a nasty question, I gave a great answer. I thought. So I think I solved it.
Listen, we are going to do things that are going to make you so proud if I win.
We are going to have victories again. We are going to win.
In fact, last night in front of the audience and Ive never said this before. Last night in front of the audience I said were going to have so many victories.
And then I said were going to win here. Were going to win on trade.
Were going to win militarily in terms of not having wars but just having such great strength that nobodys going to play with us. Nobodys going to mess with us. Okay? Nobody.
And were going to have victories. So many victories that are going to be coming outIn fact, you might get tired of victories. You may not want anymoreAnd everyone stood up and said "No, no, no, we want to keep winning."
If I win, we will have victories all over. We will win on trade. We will win on health care. We will win on everything.
I will protect your Social Security without cuts. I will protect your Medicare and your Medicaid. We are going to have something thats so special.
And you know, my whole fame is and Ill say it once. We will make America truly great again.
And thank you very much. Thank you everybody. Thank you. Thank you very much!


Thank you, everybody. Great honor. Great honor, thank you. This is a wonderful day. On a Saturday morning yet. Isn't that nice? Thank you, all. And we're going to have an incredible convention. It's really going well. We're going to have an incredible convention. And we're going to get things solved, and we're going to do lots of wonderful things for our country, most importantly.
So I'm here today to introduce the man who will be my partner in this campaign, and the White House, to fix our rigged system  we are in a rigged, rigged system  and to make America safe again and to make America great again.
I want to also address the Islamic terror attack in France. We've witnessed horror beyond belief, no matter where you look. And now it's happening more and more. And it's never going to stop.
We need new leadership. We need new thinking. We need strength. We need in our country law and order. And if I'm elected president, that will happen.
I want to express our unyielding support for the people of France, and we mourn their loss as a nation.
And as far as Turkey is concerned, so many friends in Turkey, great people, amazing people. We wish them well. It looks like they're resolving the difficulty, but we wish them well. A lot  a lot of anguish last night, but hopefully it'll all work out.
Now, as, hopefully, the next president of the United States, I want to refer back to what's happened over the years. The Middle East today is more unstable than ever before. Never been like this. Out of control. After four years of Clinton, who really led the way and led Obama down a horrible path, because I don't even think he could have made these decisions so badly, she led him right down a horrible path. He didn't know what he was doing.
Iraq, Syria, all into chaos. And Iran is on a path to nuclear weapons. And on top of that, we gave them back $150 billion, and we didn't get our hostages until the end. Now we're seeing unrest in Turkey, a further demonstration of the failures of Obama-Clinton. You just have to look, every single thing they touched has turned to horrible, horrible, death-defying problems.
We also need to bring back in this country  because we see what happened  our industry, our manufacturing, our jobs. They've been taken away, like we're babies. Taken away. And we're going to bring them back.
I found the leader who will help us deliver a safe society and a prosperous  really prosperous society for all Americans. Indiana Governor Mike Pence was my first choice. I've admired the work he's done, especially in the state of Indiana. And I'm going to go over some of those accomplishments in just a minute.
But I also admire the fact that he fights for the people, and he's going to fight for you. He is a solid, solid person.
Governor Pence served Indiana with distinction in Congress. He rose to leadership and served as the chairman of the entire House Republican Conference. Number one. He's really got the skills of a highly talented executive, leading the state of Indiana to jobs, growth, and opportunity, in spite of the relentless obstacles put in his way and every state's way by the Obama administration. It's horrible out there. High taxes and regulations. And it's out of control.
Mike Pence is a man of honor, character, and honesty. We know that. Hillary Clinton is the embodiment of corruption. She's a corrupt person. What she's done with her e-mails, what she's done with so many things, and I see the ads up all the time, the ads. She's totally bought and paid for by Wall Street, the special interests, the lobbyists, 100 percent. She's crooked Hillary.
And I think that, while she got away with murder, in fact, I think it might be her greatest accomplishment, escaping the recent scandal, and her lies, and the loss of 33,000 e-mails  but it wasn't a loss, she discarded  that in itself is a major crime. Other people have been paying tremendous prices for what they've done, which is peanuts compared to what happened with Hillary Clinton.
Thirty-three thousand e-mails are missing, and that's OK? Didn't give them to the FBI? Didn't give them to the attorney general, and that's OK? Wipes her server clean, that's OK? These are crimes. These are crimes. And how she got away with it, I think I understand it, but I think a lot of people don't.
But I do believe, while she didn't pay the price she should have paid, she's going to pay that price when November 8th rolls around. She's going to pay it at the polls. I believe that.
On top of everything else, Hillary made $21.6 million giving speeches to special interests in a short period of time. She's totally owned by Wall Street. We believe in Americanism; she believes in globalism. And it's not that she believes in it. The people that give her all of this money believe in it. And she'll believe in whatever they want her to believe. Believe me. That's it.
What a difference between crooked Hillary Clinton and Mike Pence.
Mike Pence will never be afraid to speak the name of our enemy: Radical Islam. Radical Islamic terrorism. You saw it the other day with the truck screaming out the window. You heard what he was screaming out the window. You saw it in San Bernardino. You saw it at the World Trade Center. You saw it in Orlando. How horrible was that? You saw it in Paris. You see it all over.
And Hillary is a weak person. We are the law and order candidates, and we're the law and order party. We're going to change things around. There's going to be respect again for law and order.
Hillary Clinton's foreign policy helped launch ISIS. You know, she's talking  I see the ads she puts on. If I make one statement, which is fine, she'll take that statement and put on a totally dishonest ad, because she's got a lot of money because it's given to her by the lobbyists and by the special interests. Got a lot of money.
But I see the ads on foreign policy. She's talking about Donald Trump doesn't have foreign policy experience. Of course not. I've been a very, very, very successful businessperson. I mean  but  but if you look at my calls, I said, don't go into Iraq. Nobody cared, because I was a businessperson. I was a civilian. Take the oil. Many, many calls I've made.
You take a look. I said that in Scotland and in the U.K., that was going to happen. I was the one that predicted it. And everybody said, he's wrong, he's wrong. President Obama said, if it happens, they're going to get to the back of the line, which probably is one of the reasons they lost, because I consider it a win. I think it was a win for them, actually, because they don't want to be told what to do. And they don't want to be told that when people pour into the country, they have to take them even if they're not qualified, even if they don't have paperwork, even if they have no idea where they come from.
And I said that Brexit's going to happen. I said that they are going to break away. And everybody laughed at me. And the odds were 20 percent. And then when it happened, she took an ad saying, oh, Donald Trump said this or that, but I'm the one that said it was going to happen. And some of the more fair reporters  about 30 percent of them  said he was right. I appreciate that. Seventy percent didn't, so that's OK.
So Mike Pence will never be afraid to speak the name of our enemy. So important. Now, I think if you look at one of the big reasons that I chose Mike  and one of the reasons is party unity, I have to be honest. So many people have said party unity. Because I'm an outsider. I want to be an outsider. I think it's one of the reasons I won in landslides. I won in landslides. This wasn't close. This wasn't close.
Now, this wasn't close. This was  in the history of the Republican Party, history, with 17 people running, you have to understand, other people ran against one, two, and three. There were 17. We got  I say we, because I'm the messenger, I'm a messenger  I'm doing a good job, but I'm a messenger  we got almost 14 million votes. That's more than any other person in the history of the Republican Party in the primary system running for president.
Think of it. That's more than Ronald Reagan, who we love. That's more than Richard Nixon. It's more than Dwight D. Eisenhower. You know, he won the Second World War, in all fairness. Pretty good. It's more than the Bushes.
But I mean by a lot. I don't mean by a little. But that's with 17 people. People don't over-say that. That means our message is unbelievable. And I want to thank all of the loyal people  because I have such loyal, unbelievable people, and they displayed that just yesterday in Cleveland, where it's going to be so amazing.
But they displayed it. It was on display, where we had this group of people, who  many of whom I've known, and I won't say, because for party unity, I'll say they're wonderful people, OK? Never Trump, they said, never Trump, never Trump. Oh, we're going to win. They got crushed. And they got crushed immediately, because people want what we're saying to happen.
They're tired of a country that has horrible trade deals, that has no borders, that has taxes that are through the roof, highest taxed nation just about in the world, that has regulations that don't allow you to start a business and destroy your business if you do start  and, by the way, speaking of destroying businesses, we're going to take care of the miners and we're going to take care of the steelworkers. We're going to put them back to work.
So they're very tired of it. But I want to thank all of those people that  delegates that were on the different committees, because, boy, was that something. Did we show them something. And unfortunately, the vote was very late. But essentially, we had 112- 12. This was the vote that was going to put it onto the floor and we're going to have a big fight. We're not going to have a fight. People agree with what we've  they want the wall. They want the borders. They want these things to happen.
And what we're doing...
And what we're doing that I'm so proud of, so proud  and nobody else would even think about doing it  I fought very hard for it. We'll call it the Johnson amendment, where he took away from the evangelicals  and I want to thank the evangelicals, because without the evangelicals, I could not have won this nomination. The evangelicals have been unbelievable. I dominated with the evangelicals. A lot of people were surprised. They say he's not perfect. But you know what? They know I'm going to get the job done, and they're really smart.
And I said  and I said for the evangelicals, that we're going to do something that nobody's even tried to do. You have the Johnson amendment passed by Lyndon Johnson and his group. And he was a powerful president. He knew how to get things done. He got bogged down in a war that was a disaster and it destroyed him. But he was a powerful president.
And we call it the Johnson amendment, where you are just absolutely shunned if you're evangelical, if you want to talk religion, you lose your tax-exempt status. We put into the platform, we're going to get rid of that horrible Johnson amendment. And we're going to let evangelicals, we're going to let Christians and Jews and people of religion talk without being afraid to talk.
I saw this. I had so many great leaders so many times up to my office, the top  the absolute top evangelical leaders, Christian leaders, Jewish leaders, believe it or not, some Muslim leaders  people are going to be surprised to hear that  I had the top leaders up to my office, and I said, why is it that you're so powerful as an individual, and yet when you get out there, you're sort of timid?
And they didn't know how to answer the question. And it took two, three meetings before I figured it out. One great, great gentleman that everybody knows, but whose name I will not reveal, said, Mr. Trump, we live in fear in our churches and our synagogues. We live in fear that we're going to lose our tax-exempt status if we say anything that's even slightly political.
And I looked out the window. I was in Trump Tower, and I pointed to people walking down the street. I said, well, they have the right to speak, but you don't. That means they're more powerful than you are. We have to do something about it. How did it start? How did it start?
And they said, it started because of Lyndon Johnson. And he actually had a problem in Texas with a certain religious leader. And he did this, and he got it done. And we're going to undo it, so that religious leaders in this country, and those unbelievable people, and not because they backed me in such large numbers, but so that religion can again have a voice, because religion's voice has been taken away. And we're going to change that. OK? All right.
Back to Mike Pence. So one of the primary reasons I chose Mike was I looked at Indiana, and I won Indiana big. Remember, Indiana was going to be the firewall. That's where Trump was going to  they agreed I'd win New York, I'd win Pennsylvania, I'd win all these places. But Indiana was going to be the firewall.
So I got to study Indiana, and I got to study New York and a lot of other places, and I saw how NAFTA, signed by Bill Clinton, has drained our manufacturing jobs, just drained us like we've never been drained before. NAFTA, again, signed by Bill Clinton. NAFTA is the worst economic deal in the history of our country. Manufacturing down in some states 55 percent, 60 percent. It's a horror show, moving to Mexico, moving to other places.
I have a friend who's a great builder. What he builds is plants. That's all he does, is build plants. He doesn't build buildings. He doesn't  he builds plants. It's the biggest in the world, from what I hear.
I said, how's business? I was with him the other day. How's business? He goes unbelievable. I said, really, wow, I'm surprised. Why is it unbelievable? Because I think of him as building in this country. He says, Donald, what we're doing in Mexico, you won't believe. I said, what do you mean? He said, we're building plants in Mexico the likes of which we've never seen.
I said, what about this country? Not much. Not much. That's the expression. He said exactly that. Not much. I said, but Mexico? He said, you've never seen anything like it. It's incredible.
Folks, that's going to stop. We're going to go reverse it. We're going to bring our jobs back to this country. We can't be the stupid people anymore. OK?
And he was better than a pollster. He's better than a consultant. I would say, how are we doing? And you get a big report that costs you millions of dollars. Doesn't cost me millions. Me, I give them $10,000, OK?
It costs other people millions. It costs other campaigns millions to get a report. Every time they get a report, it's millions. But I'll tell you what, a guy like this is better than anybody you can hire to do a report. And he said it. He didn't say it from the standpoint of he's upset about it. Just fact. How are we doing? Unbelievable in Mexico. In fact, he actually said, I've never, ever seen anything like it.
And if you look, Ford is building massive plants there instead of Michigan. We want them to build them in Michigan. They're going to build them in Michigan. And you know that I know how to do that. So easy. So easy.
But they're not going to do and they're not going to take advantage of us without retribution. There are consequences when you fire thousands of people and move to another country and then think you're going to you're your product and sell it in here. There are consequences. And those consequences are going to keep companies in our country. It's very simple. And everybody here knows what the consequences are, but I won't say that because I'm much more interested right now in Mike.
Indiana's unemployment rate  and this is the primary reason I wanted Mike, other than he looks very good, other than he's got an incredible family, incredible wife and family  Karen is amazing.
Incredible family. Highly respected. Expected to go for another four years. He would have won, I think, very easily in Indiana. Indiana, their unemployment rate has fallen, when he was there, when he started, 8.4 percent when he was governor, when he took over, to less than 5 percent in May of 2016. Since January 2013, Indiana's labor force has increased by more than 186,000 jobs. You have to understand, I've gone around to all these states. I've gone to all of them. And every time, I have statisticians. I say give me the stats on a state.
And it's always bad, down, down, down. Down 40 percent, 50 percent, 60 percent in some cases. Here's somebody where it's gone up. Private sector job growth is up by more than 147,000 jobs since 2013. That's like very unusual.
Governor Pence balanced the budget. Can you imagine a balanced budget? Our budget's so out of whack in this country, we don't know what we're doing. We're going to owe very soon $21 trillion. He balanced the budget. They don't know what that means. Governor Pence balanced the budget, produced a surplus, and maintains a $2 billion reserve fund in the state of Indiana.
It's also rated AAA, their bonds are rated AAA. Very few states have that. AAA. The best. That's as good as you can get, whether you're a company, a state, AAA.
Indiana was recently recognized by Chief Executive Magazine as the number-one state in the Midwest for business. Number one. And it's not even close. There are approximately 34,000 fewer Hoosiers on unemployment insurance now than there were when Mike Pence took office. So you have fewer Hoosiers, fewer people from Indiana.
And besides that, Bobby Knight, my friend, who really did help me. I mean, if you want a reference, Bobby Knight in Indiana, we love Bobby Knight. But he agrees with everything I'm saying. He loves the governor.
Indiana has the second-lowest unemployment rate in the nation, for veterans, where nobody's fighting for the veterans like I'm fighting for the veterans, the veterans have been left behind.
If you remember a few months ago, Hillary Clinton said really  they're doing much better, the V.A. is much better. They're doing a much better job than people give it credit for. People are dying on line waiting for five, six days for doctors. People are dying on  they can't even see a doctor. It's a scandal.
Take a look at what's happening with the V.A. in Arizona. Take a look at what's happening with  you know, just the Veterans Administration hospitals. It's a scandal. It's corrupt. It's incompetent. It's a scandal. And Hillary Clinton thought it was just fine. And, boy, am I going to win big with the veterans. I mean, we know that for a fact.
So it's now 2.4 percent for veterans. In 2013, when Mike Pence took office, the rate for veterans was 6.7 percent. It was 31st in the nation, one of the bad ones, and now it's almost the best. Got them jobs. Got them jobs.
Indianapolis is ranked second in top 10 metro areas for young college graduates. That's a great thing. They're going to stay there. That's a great thing. And Mike worked hard on that. He was telling me, that was not easy.
Under Governor Pence's leadership, Indiana enacted the largest K- 12 education funding increase in the state's history. So you're balancing budgets, and yet you're giving more money to education. Isn't that a great thing?
Indiana has just about the largest school choice program in America. School choice is where it's at, folks. You want to get your schools better, you better get rid of Common Core fast.
Governor Pence enacted the largest income tax cut in the state's history. Think of that. We're cutting taxes and balancing budgets. And along with corporate tax reform, just about number one in the country. CNBC ranked Indiana first in the nation for its infrastructure.
So with all of these cuts and all of these balancing budgets, we're spending more money on education, and the infrastructure is kept up. That had so much  look, as a builder, nobody in the history of this country has ever known so much about infrastructure as Donald Trump. I build infrastructure. Do I know how to build a wall? Do I know how to build infrastructure?
You know, it's very interesting. We're building  we're building  I won the  which is pretty amazing with the Obama administration, but I won the right to have the old post office building on Pennsylvania Avenue, right near the White House, and it's an amazing  probably the best location, one of the most sought after projects in the history of the GSA, General Services. And I really like what's happened.
We're going to have an opening very soon. Ivanka and Eric and Don did a fantastic job on it.
But I thought the other day, I was going over the numbers, we're under budget and about a year  actually more than a year  we're a year ahead of schedule, and we're under budget substantially. And the quality of the work is even better than we originally were going to do.
And when I explained to a government representative that we're under budget and ahead of schedule, they almost fell off, because they've never heard those words before. They've never heard them.
So when I see what happened to Indiana, which was having tremendous problems, when I see what happened to Indiana under Mike's work  also his predecessor did a great job, by the way, great job, who's now at Duke  who's now at Purdue  when I see what happened with respect to the numbers, the state, and everything else, that, to me, was probably the single most important point, because it's something that hasn't happened  almost has not happened in this whole country.
The turnaround and the strength of Indiana has been incredible, and I learned that when I campaigned there. And I learned that when I won that state in a landslide. And I learned that when Governor Pence, under tremendous pressure from establishment people, endorsed somebody else, but it was more of an endorsement for me, if you remember. He talked about Trump, then he talked about Ted  who's a good guy, by the way, who's going to be speaking at the convention, Ted Cruz, good guy  but he talked about Trump, Ted, then he went back to Trump. I said, who did he endorse?
So even though he was under pressure, because I'm so, you know, outside of the establishment, it was the single greatest non- endorsement I've ever had in my life, OK? I will tell you.
So with that, I would like to introduce a man who I truly believe will be outstanding in every way and will be the next vice president of the United States, Governor Mike Pence. Thank you. Thank you, everybody. Thank you.








7/12/2016
WOW. WOW! [ CHEERING ] WHOA! THAT'S A LOT OF PEOPLE. THAT'S A LOT OF PEOPLE. THANK YOU, EVERYBODY. THANK YOU. ALL RIGHT. LET'S TURN THAT MUSIC DOWN. WE WANT TO GET TO BUSINESS, RIGHT? GET TO BUSINESS. HOW IS YOUR GOVERNOR DOING, BY THE WAY? GOOD? I THINK SO. I THINK SO. I JUST WANT TO THANK ALL OF THE PEOPLE OF INDIANA. YOU KNOW, WE HAD A GREAT VICTORY HERE NOT SO LONG AGO. AND INDIANA WAS THE STATE THAT PUT ME OVER THE TOP. THANK YOU, FOLKS. THANK YOU. [ CHEERING ] WELL, WE HAVE A LOT OF THINGS TO DISCUSS, BUT WE HAD SOME VERY BAD NEWS A FEW DAYS AGO, AND YOU SAW WHAT HAPPENED. A LOT OF BAD THINGS ARE HAPPENING. AND I WAS GOING TO GO THROUGH A WHOLE LITANY OF THAT, BUT WE DON'T WANT TO. WE WANT TO BE UPBEAT. WE WANT TO BE POSITIVE. WE WANT TO BE STRONG. AND WE'RE GOING TO BE STRONG. WE'RE GOING TO BE STRONGER THAN EVER BEFORE. WE'RE GOING TO BE GREATER THAN EVER BEFORE. WE'RE GOING TO BRING OUR JOBS BACK. WE'RE GOING BRING OUR MILITARY BACK. IT'S BEING DEPLETED SO BADLY. WE'RE GOING TO TAKE CARE OF OUR VETERANS, WHICH WE HAVE TO TAKE CARE OF. WE'RE GOING TO GET RID OF OBAMACARE, WHICH IS A DISASTER. [ CHEERING ] AND REPLACE IT WITH SOMETHING TERRIFIC. WE END COMMON CORE. WE BRING OUR EDUCATION BACK TO THE LOCAL COMMUNITIES LIKE THIS LOCAL COMMUNITY WHERE THE PEOPLE LOVE THEIR CHILDREN AND THEY WANT TO SEE THEIR CHILDREN BE WELL EDUCATED. IT'S SO IMPORTANT. WE'RE GOING TO SAVE OUR SECOND AMENDMENT. WE'RE GOING TO SAVE OUR SECOND AMENDMENT. AND IT'S UNDER SIEGE. YOU KNOW, I WROTE A FEW WORDS TODAY. AND I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT THAT WE GO THROUGH IT AS A GROUP. IT'S BEEN A SPECIAL PLACE AND YOU'RE SPECIAL PEOPLE. AND I KNOW SO MANY PEOPLE TONIGHT IN THE AUDIENCE. AND YOU'RE ALL OVER. LOOK AT ALL THOSE CAMERAS UP THERE, FOLKS. LOOK AT ALL THOSE CAMERAS. THEY DON'T STOP. THEY DON'T STOP. BUT I JUST WANTED TO SAY I WROTE THIS QUICKLY, BUT IT MEANS IT CAME RIGHT FROM THE HEART. AND I HAVE TO SAY THAT OUR WHOLE NATION GRIEVES AND MOURNS FOR THE LOSS OF FIVE HEROS IN DALLAS, LAW ENFORCEMENT. THESE WERE GREAT, GREAT PEOPLE. GREAT PEOPLE. [ APPLAUSE ] WE PRAY FOR THEIR FAMILIES. WE PRAY FOR THEIR LOVED ONES. WE PRAY FOR ALL THE WOUNDED SURVIVORS. WE PRAY FOR OUR COUNTRY. IT'S SO IMPORTANT. THE POLICE ARE NOT JUST PART OF OUR SOCIETY. OUR POLICE ARE THE BEST OF OUR SOCIETY. REMEMBER THAT. WE HAVE TO REMEMBER THAT. THEY REPRESENT OUR HIGHEST IDEALS, OUR GREATEST VALUES, AND OUR MOST NOBLE CHARACTERISTICS. WHEN OUR POLICE ARE ATTACKED, OUR ENTIRE NATION IS ATTACKED. REMEMBER THAT. REMEMBER THAT. SO THE MESSAGE MUST BE DELIVERED CLEARLY FOR ALL TO HEAR, THE HOSTILITY AGAINST OUR POLICE HAS TO END, AND IT HAS TO END RIGHT NOW. AND WE HAVE TO SAY TOGETHER, AND WE HAVE TO BE STRONG. WE HAVE TO TAKE CARE OF EVERYONE. THE TWO PEOPLE THAT WERE KILLED IN LOUISIANA AND MINNESOTA, IT WAS TOUGH. IT WAS TOUGH TO WATCH FOR EVERYBODY HERE IT WAS TOUGH TO WATCH. WE HAVE TO FIGURE IT OUT. WE HAVE TO FIGURE OUT WHAT IS GOING ON. WAS IT TRAINING? WAS IT SOMETHING ELSE? IT COULD HAVE BEEN SOMETHING ELSE. WE HAVE TO TAKE CARE OF EVERYBODY. REMEMBER THAT. BUT WE HAVE TO ALSO -- WE HAVE TO GET TO THE BOTTOM OF THINGS. WE HAVE TO. BUT WE CAN NEVER, EVER FORGET THE HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF GREAT DEALS AND GREAT THINGS THAT OUR POLICE ALL OVER THE COUNTRY DO, AND NOBODY RECOGNIZES THEM FOR WHAT THEY DO. AND WHEN THERE IS A PROBLEM, AS BAD AS THESE TWO SITUATIONS WERE, AND I PERSONALLY THINK THEY WERE, THEY WERE BAD. I HATED, I HATED WATCHING IT. BUT AS BAD AS THEY WERE, THEY GET BROADCAST ALL OVER THE WORLD FOR DAYS AND DAYS, AND ALL OF THE GOOD THINGS WHICH ARE MAGNIFIED THOUSANDS OF TIMES, NOBODY TALKS ABOUT. SO WE HAVE TO REMEMBER, WE HAVE TO CHERISH AND TAKE CARE OF OUR POLICE. IF WE DON'T, IF WE DON'T, WE DON'T HAVE A COUNTRY ANYMORE. WE HAVE A COUNTRY IN CHAOS. AND REMEMBER THIS. AND I SAY IT ONCE, AND I SAY IT WITH LOVE, AND I SAY IT WITH COMPASSION. BECAUSE I HAVE LOVE FOR OUR COUNTRY, AND I HAVE GREAT COMPASSION FOR OUR PEOPLE IN OUR COUNTRY. BUT I AM THE LAW AND ORDER CANDIDATE. WE NEED LAW AND ORDER, AND WE NEED STRENGTH IN THIS COUNTRY. WE DON'T HAVE STRENGTH IN OUR COUNTRY. WE HAVE CROOKED HILLARY CLINTON, AS CROOKED AS YOU GET. I MEAN, YOU SAW THAT WITH THE E-MAILS. IT'S A RIGGED SYSTEM, FOLKS. IT'S A RIGGED SYSTEM. JUST REMEMBER IT. IT'S A RIGGED SYSTEM. IT'S RIGGED IN SO MANY DIFFERENT WAYS. WE'RE GOING TO STRAIGHTEN IT OUT. YOU CAN'T EVEN WATCH WHAT HAPPENS. WE HAD A YOUNG MAN WHO DID NOTHING BY COMPARISON TO WHAT SHE DID, AND HE WARNED HIS FRIENDS OF A PROBLEM THAT WAS COMING MILITARILY. AND THEY CAME DOWN ON HIM WITH A VENGEANCE. AND THEY LET HER GO. 33,000 MISSING E-MAILS. THEY LET HER GO. LIES ALL OVER THE PLACE. AND THEY LET HER GO. THINK OF IT. IT'S A DISGRACE. SO WE'RE GOING TO GET ON TO OTHER SUBJECTS. BUT I HAVE TO SAY LAW ENFORCEMENT HAS TO REMAIN WITH US. WE HAVE TO TAKE CARE OF OUR POLICE AND OUR LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS. WE'RE GOING TO DO IT. WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO DO IT. WE'RE GOING REMEMBER THAT THEY DO A FABULOUS JOB. WE'RE GOING TO REMEMBER THAT THEY DO A GREAT JOB. AND EVERY ONCE IN A WHILE, PROBLEMS WILL HAPPEN. AND WE'RE GOING TAKE CARE OF THOSE PROBLEMS. AND THEY CAN BE BAD PROBLEMS. BUT WE ARE GOING TO TREAT OUR POLICE WITH RESPECT. REMEMBER THAT. OKAY? NOW I'M LOOKING AT DIFFERENT RATES AND DIFFERENT CRIMES. AND YOU SEE THE CRIME RATE IN LARGE PORTIONS OF OUR COUNTRY IS GOING WAY UP. YOU LOOK AT CERTAIN INNER CITIES, AND LOOK AT CHICAGO. LOOK AT WHAT IS GOING ON. SINCE PRESIDENT OBAMA BECAME PRESIDENT, ALMOST 5,000 KILLINGS IN CHICAGO. AND NOBODY TALKS ABOUT IT. WELL, WE'RE GOING TO START TALKING ABOUT IT. BECAUSE WE HAVE TO MAKE THIS A SAFE COUNTRY. AND, YOU KNOW, I WOULD SAY TWO WEEKS AGO, A MONTH AGO, I WOULDN'T BE SAYING THESE WORDS. I WAS TALKING ABOUT THE BORDER. I WAS TALKING ABOUT THE WALL. AND WE WILL BUILD THE WALL. THAT I CAN TELL YOU. I CAN TELL YOU. WE'RE GOING TO BUILD IT. DON'T WORRY ABOUT IT. ARE YOU READY? WHO IS GOING TO PAY FOR THE WALL?
 I DON'T HEAR YOU. WHO IS GOING TO PAY FOR THE WALL?
AND THEY WILL. VERY MUCH. THEY WILL. 100%. AND YOU KNOW WHAT? THEY'LL BE HAPPY TO PAY FOR THE WALL. WE HAVE A TRADE DEFICIT WITH MEXICO THAT YOU WOULDN'T BELIEVE. BILLIONS AND BILLIONS AND BILLIONS OF DOLLARS A YEAR. WE'RE LOSING ON THE BORDER. WE'RE LOSING ON TRADE. AND WHEN I WAS IN THE DEBATES AND I MENTIONED THIS, PEOPLE WOULD COME UP THAT I WAS DEBATING AGAINST, AND THEY USED TO SAY DONALD, YOU'RE NOT REALLY GOING TO BUILD A WALL, ARE YOU? I SAY ABSOLUTELY. THEY SAY BUT YOU CAN'T BUILD A WALL. BUT I'M IN THE CONSTRUCTION. YOU KNOW HOW EASY A WALL IS? A WALL. WE BUILD 95-STORY BUILDINGS WITH BATHROOMS. THAT'S TOUGH CONSTRUCTION, NOT A WALL. WALLS DON'T HAVE BATHROOMS. AND BATHROOMS ARE ALWAYS TOUGH. BUT WE'RE GOING TO HAVE A VERY BIG BEAUTIFUL GATE IN THAT WALL, BIG AND BEAUTIFUL. AND THAT GATE IS GOING TO BE OPEN. AND IT'S GOING TO BE WIDE OPEN FOR PEOPLE TO COME INTO OUR COUNTRY, BUT THEY'RE GOING TO COME INTO OUR COUNTRY LEGALLY. THEY'RE GOING TO COME IN LEGALLY. AND THERE ARE GOING TO BE PEOPLE THAT LOVE OUR COUNTRY. THEY'RE NOT GOING TO BE PEOPLE THAT HATE OUR COUNTRY. THEY'RE NOT GOING TO BE PEOPLE THAT WE DON'T KNOW WHERE THEY COME FROM. THEY'RE NOT GOING TO BE PEOPLE THAT COME FROM THE MIGRATION THAT DON'T HAVE PAPERWORK, THAT DON'T HAVE PASSPORTS, THAT WE HAVE NO IDEA WHERE THEY'RE FROM. WE HAVE NO IDEA WHAT THEIR MOTIVES ARE. WE'RE GOING TO SAY NO. SORRY. NO. AND WE'LL HELP. AND IN SYRIA, WE'LL BUILD SAFE ZONES, AND WE'LL GET OTHER PEOPLE TO PUT UP THE MONEY, BECAUSE WE'RE GOING TO OWE VERY SOON 20 TRILLION, TRILLION WITH A T. NOBODY EVEN KNOWS WHAT IT MEANS. WE'RE GOING TO OWE -- RIGHT NOW, CAN YOU BELIEVE THIS? $20 TRILLION. SOON GOING TO $21 TRILLION. SO WE'RE GOING GET THE GULF STATES WHO HAVE SO MUCH MONEY, FOLKS. SO MUCH MONEY. AND WE'RE GOING TO GET THEM TO PUT UP THE MONEY AND OTHERS. AND WE'RE GOING TO TAKE CARE OF PEOPLE. AND WE'RE GOING HAVE COMPASSION. BUT WE CAN'T ALLOW THEM TO COME INTO OUR COUNTRY. WE HAVE ENOUGH PROBLEMS RIGHT NOW. YOU SEE WHAT HAPPENED IN ORLANDO. YOU SEE WHAT HAPPENED IN SAN BERNARDINO. WE CAN'T ALLOW IT TO HAPPEN. SO WE'RE GOING TO BUILD SAFE ZONES. WE'RE GOING TAKE CARE OF PEOPLE. WE'RE GOING TO HAVE OTHER PEOPLE FUND THESE SAFE ZONES. WE'RE GOING TO BUILD UP OUR MILITARY. WE SHOULD HAVE NEVER BEEN IN IRAQ. BUT ONCE WE WENT INTO IRAQ, WE SHOULD HAVE NEVER LEFT THE WAY WE LEFT. WE LEFT LIKE FOOLS. WE WENT IN, SHOULD HAVE NEVER HAPPENED. I DIDN'T WANT TO GO FROM THE BEGINNING, AND I HAVE PROOF FROM THE BEGINNING. I DIDN'T WANT IRAQ. I SAID YOU'RE GOING TO DESTABILIZE THE ENTIRE MIDDLE EAST, AND THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED. BUT THEN WE WERE THERE. LOSING THOUSANDS OF LIVES, SPENDING TRILLIONS AND TRILLIONS OF DOLLARS. PROBABLY IN THE MIDDLE EAST WE'RE UP TO $4 TRILLION. AND WE'RE IN WORSE SHAPE NOW THAN WE WERE 15 YEARS AGO BEFORE THE WHOLE DEAL STARTED. FAR WORSE. NOT EVEN CLOSE. FAR WORSE. FAR WORSE. SO WHAT WE'RE GOING TO DO IS WE'RE GOING TO START THINKING SMART. WE'RE GOING TO BE SMART AGAIN. WE'RE GOING TO MAKE GREAT MILITARY, AND BY THE WAY, I SAID FOR YEARS WE'VE GOT TO KEEP THE OIL. I SAID KEEP THE OIL. YOU LEAVE, YOU KEEP THE OIL. WE DIDN'T DO IT. WE DIDN'T DO IT. I SAID IT FOR YEARS. ONCE WE WERE IN, I SAID WHEN WE GET OUT, IT'S GOING TO BE A DISASTER, BUT WHEN WE GET OUT, WE SHOULD HAVE LEFT SOME TROOPS THERE. AND I HATE SAYING THAT. BUT WE SHOULD HAVE LEFT SOME TROOPS THERE, AND IT WOULD HAVE BEEN BETTER, CERTAINLY, THAN IT IS RIGHT NOW. CAN'T BE ANY WORSE. BUT I ALWAYS SAID KEEP THE OIL. BUT WE DIDN'T KEEP THE OIL. SO WHO HAS THE OIL RIGHT NOW? A LOT OF THE OIL IS HAD BY ISIS. AND WE CREATED ISIS. AND HILLARY CLINTON THROUGH HER INCOMPETENCE DIRECTLY AND INDIRECTLY CREATED ISIS. AND NOW SHE WANTS TO GET RID OF IT. SHE SAYS YES, WE WILL FIGHT ISIS. SHE IS THE ONE THAT CREATED IT WITH STUPIDITY, WITH STUPID, STUPID POLICY. POLICY THAT'S ONLY GOING TO GET WORSE. SHE IS THE ONE THAT CREATED IT. AND THAT'S WHAT'S HAPPENED. AND SO NOW WE HAVE PROBLEMS ALL OVER THE PLACE. WE HAVE OUR CITIES EXPLODING. WE HAVE ISIS LOOKING AT US. AND BY THE WAY, WHEN OUR ENEMIES ALL OVER THE WORLD, INCLUDING OUR FRIENDS ALL OVER THE WORLD LOOK AT WHAT'S HAPPENING TO OUR COUNTRY, WHERE THE OTHER NIGHT YOU HAD 11, THINK OF IT, 11 CITIES POTENTIALLY IN A BLOWUP STAGE. MARCHES ALL OVER THE UNITED STATES, AND TOUGH MARCHES, ANGER, HATRED, HATRED. STARTED BY A MANIAC THAT SOME PEOPLE ASKED FOR A MOMENT OF SILENCE FOR HIM. FOR THE KILLER, FOR THE KILLER. OKAY? SO WHEN OUR ENEMIES LOOK AT WHAT IS GOING ON WITH OUR COUNTRY, THEY SEE OUR DEFICITS. THEY SEE WE DON'T WIN ANYMORE. WE DON'T WIN. WE DON'T WIN. WE DON'T WIN AT ANYTHING. I ALWAYS SAY WHEN I WAS GOING, WHEN I WAS YOUNG GOING TO HIGH SCHOOL AND GOING TO COLLEGE AND BEFORE THAT WE NEVER LOST. YOU KNOW, UNITED STATES, THEY SAID HAD NEVER LOST A WAR. NOW WE NEVER WIN. WE DON'T WIN ON TRADE. WE DON'T WIN WITH OUR MILITARY. OUR MILITARY IS SO DEPLETED, OUR MILITARY HAS FIGHTER JETS THAT ARE IN USE FLOWN BY GREAT, GREAT AMERICAN PEOPLE THAT ARE SO OLD, AND THEY CAN'T GET PARTS FOR THE FIGHTER JETS. THESE ARE PEOPLE FLYING THESE JETS NOW IN COMBAT. THEY CAN'T GET PARTS. SO THEY GO TO THE PLANE GRAVEYARDS IN THE DESERTS. THEY GO TO MUSEUMS WHERE THEY HAVE SIMILAR PLANES, AND THEY STRIP APART TO USE FOR OUR FIGHTER PILOTS TO FLY. THIS IS WHAT WE'VE BEEN REDUCED TO. AND I'LL TELL YOU SOMETHING. HILLARY CLINTON IS INCOMPETENT, OKAY. THE GREATEST SINGLE THING IN MY OPINION THAT SHE'S EVER DONE IS TO GET OUT OF THE E-MAIL PROBLEM. I THINK IT IS INCREDIBLE. SHE DID A GREAT JOB ON THAT. I THINK IT IS HER GREATEST ACHIEVEMENT. I THINK WHEN THEY LOOK BACK ON HILLARY CLINTON, THEY WILL SAY THE GREATEST ACHIEVEMENT OF HILLARY CLINTON WAS GETTING OUT OF THIS PROBLEM WITH E-MAIL TZ. HOUDINI COULDN'T HAVE GOTTEN OUT. SHE WAS SO GUILTY. I HAVE A LIST. LOOK. PAGE AFTER PAGE OF THE LIES -- PAGE AFTER PAGE OF THE LIES. ALL OVER. LOOK AT THIS. PAGE, PAGE. LOOK, I DON'T WANT TO READ IT TO YOU. THE PRESS WOULD SAY, YOU SHOULD SPEND YOUR ENTIRE SPEECH TALKING ABOUT HILLARY CLINTON AND THE E-MAILS. I DON'T WANT TO TALK ABOUT IT. YOU KNOW WHAT, IT WAS ALL LIES, FOLKS. I DON'T HAVE TO GO THROUGH AND BORE EVERYBODY. IT WAS SO HORRIBLE. IT WAS SO DISGUSTING. IT WAS SO OUTRAGEOUS. YOU LOOK AT GENERAL PETRAEUS AND LOOK AT WHAT HAPPENED TO HIM FOR A TINY FRACTION OF WHAT CROOKED HILLARY DID. YOU LOOK AT OTHER PEOPLE, FOR A TINY FRACTION, LOOK AT WHAT HAPPENED TO THEM. SO I JUST TELL YOU THIS, WE HAVE A CANDIDATE ON THE OTHER SIDE WHO, IF SHE EVER GETS ELECTED, IT WILL BE FOUR MORE DISGUSTING YEARS OF OBAMA, IT WILL BE FOUR MORE YEARS OF WEAKNESS, IT WILL BE FOUR MORE YEARS OF CIVIL UNREST. IT WILL BE FOUR MORE YEARS OF NOT WINNING WITH OUR MILITARY AND NOT WINNING AGAINST ISIS. THEY DON'T HAVE A CLUE HOW TO BEAT ISIS. THEY DON'T HAVE A CLUE. BUT IT WILL BE FOUR MORE YEARS OF OBAMA, AND OBAMA CARE AND ALL OF THESE THINGS THAT DON'T WORK. EXCEPT I THINK ACTUALLY IT WILL BE WORSE. TODAY I SEE BERNIE SANDERS GAVE HER THIS VERY YOU KNOW, SORT OF STRANGE ENDORSEMENT. I WANT TO TELL YOU, A LOT OF BERNIE SANDERS PEOPLE ARE SO UPSET ABOUT IT, THEY ARE GOING TO BE VOTING FOR TRUMP. I REALLY BELIEVE THAT. THEY'RE GOING TO BE VOTING FOR TRUMP. THEY ARE GOING TO BE VOTING FOR TRUMP. BECAUSE THE ONE THING THAT BERNIE SANDERS AND I HAVE IN COMMON WAS TRADE. NOW HE CAN'T DO ANYTHING ABOUT IT. HE JUST KNEW IT WAS BAD. I KNOW HOW TO FIX IT. BECAUSE I AM IN FAVOR OF FREE TRADE. A LOT OF PEOPLE SAY I'M AN ISOLATIONIST, WHEN YOU LOSE $800 BILLION A YEAR ON TRADE DEFICITS, MAYBE THAT IS NOT THE WORSE THING. BUT WE'LL STRAIGHT IT OUT. I BELIEVE IN OPEN BORDERS FOR TRADE AND FREE TRADE. THE PROBLEM WE HAVE IS THAT VIRTUALLY EVERY SINGLE COUNTRY THAT DEALS WITH US ARE FAR SHARPER AND FAR BETTER. THEY HAVE THEIR BEST NEGOTIATORS. WE HAVE PEOPLE THAT ARE POLITICAL HACKS NEGOTIATING FOR US AND PEOPLE THAT DON'T KNOW WHAT THEY'RE DOING. I HAVE THE GREATEST BUSINESSMEN IN THE WORLD THAT HAVE ENDORSED ME, INCLUDING PEOPLE LIKE CARL ICAHN, GREAT BUSINESSMAN. WE HAVE SOME OF THE GREATEST NEGOTIATORS, MAYBE THE GREATEST IN THE WORLD AND WE DON'T USE THEM. WE USE POLITICAL HACKS. WE HAVE PEOPLE IN THERE THAT GOT IN FOR POLITICS. YOU COULD LOOK AT THE BIGGEST COMPANIES IN THE WORLD, AND IT IS SMALL POTATOES. IT IS PEANUTS COMPARED TO SOME OF THE MASSIVE TRADE DEALS. AND WE HAVE PEOPLE THAT SHOULD NEVER BE NEGOTIATING TRADE DEALS. JUST LIKE WE HAVE SECRETARY OF STATE KERRY NEGOTIATING WITH IRAN, AND WHAT THEY DID TO HIM AND YOU BECAUSE HE HAS NO IDEA WHAT THE HELL HE WAS DOING AND WHAT HE GAVE AWAY, ISRAEL IS IN SERIOUS JEOPARDY, FRANKLY WE'RE IN SERIOUS JEOPARDY, AND WE MADE A POWER OUT OF IRAN. WE MADE A POWER. NUMBER ONE, WE SHOULD HAVE NEVER GONE IN AND NEGOTIATED THAT DEAL UNTIL WE GOT OUR HOSTAGES BACK. EVER. EVER. WE SHOULD HAVE NEVER, EVER GONE IN. AND WHAT YOU SAY IS, FOLKS, WE HAVE TO GET THEM BACK. AND IF YOU DON'T WANT TO GIVE THEM BACK, YOU LEAVE THE MEETING. YOU LEAVE THE MEETING. AND YOU DOUBLE UP YOUR SANCTIONS, YOU WOULD HAVE HAD THEM BACK WITHIN 24 HOURS, I GUARANTEE YOU THAT. BUT WE DSHTIDN'T DO THAT. I KEPT WAITING FOR THE WHOLE DELEGATION, I KEPT WAITING FOR THEM TO LEAVE, TO GET UP AND LEAVE. I USED TO SAY GET UP AND LEAVE. PERFECT. GET UP. WE DIDN'T WIN ANYTHING. THE ONLY TIME THAT KERRY LEFT WAS AT 73 YEARS OLD TO GO INTO A BICYCLE LACE WHERE HE FELL AND BROKE HIS LEG, RIGHT. AND I ALWAYS TELL PEOPLE, I PROMISE YOU I WILL NEVER ENTER A BICYCLE RACE WHEN I'M IN THE MIDST OF AN IMPORTANT NUCLEAR NEGOTIATION, I PROMISE. I PROMISE. BUT WHEN YOU LOOK AT IT, NUMBER ONE, WE SHOULD HAVE GOTTEN THEM BACK. AND THE OTHER THING, WE SHOULD HAVE NEVER GIVEN THEM BACK THE $150 BILLION. AND I WOULD HAVE SAID VERY NICELY, MY FATHER USED TO THINK I WAS A LITTLE BIT ROUGH, AND HE USED TO GO, EASY, SON. SON, TAKE IT NICE AND EASY. YOU HAVE TO TAKE THE LUMPS OUT. HE HAD AN EXPRESSION. GOOD FATHER. WE ALL HAVE GREAT FATHERS, I HOPE. I HAD A GOOD FATHER. BUT I LEARNED A LOT. HE SAID, AND HE WOULD GO LIKE THIS THE LUMPS OUT. TAKE THE LUMPS. EASY. NICE AND EASY. TAKE THE LUMPS OUT. YOU'RE A LITTLE TOO ROUGH. WHAT DO YOU MEAN, POP? YOU'RE A LITTLE TOO ROUGH. AND OVER THE YEARS, I THINK I LEARNED THAT. MADE GREAT DEALS AND BUILT A GREAT COMPANY. GREAT COMPANY. TOOK ADVANTAGE OF EVERY SINGLE THING YOU CAN BECAUSE YOU ARE WORKING FOR YOURSELF AND FAMILIES AND YOUR EMPLOYEES AND TOOK ADVANTAGE OF THE LAWS, SOME OF THE LAWS ARE THE DUMBEST LAWS I'VE EVER SEEN AND SO STUPID BUT YOU TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THEM. YOU'RE LIKE A BUSINESS PERSON, RIGHT, GOT TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THEM. BECAUSE YOU ARE REALLY REPRESENTING YOUR EMPLOYEES, YOUR COMPANY AND YOUR FAMILY. BUT MY FATHER WOULD SAY TAKE THE LUMPS OUT. SO HERE IS WHAT I WOULD HAVE SAID ON THE 150. IN THE OLD DAYS WHEN I'M YOUNG, I WOULD SAY WE'RE NOT PAYING YOU BACK THE 150 BILLION, YOU'RE NOT GETTING IT. AND THERE COULD BE A LOT OF HARD FEELING IN THE ROOM. TAKE A WHILE -- THEY WILL STILL COME BACK, DON'T WORRY ABOUT IT. BECAUSE THEY NEED US. THEY NEED US. AND THEN I WOULD HAVE LEFT AND HERE GO THE SANCTIONS. I WOULD HAVE DONE TWO THINGS. NUMBER ONE, HOSTAGES BEFORE WE UTTER THE FIRST WORD. AND NUMBER TWO -- AND HOW LONG WERE THE HOSTAGES THERE. THAT NEGOTIATION TOOK FOREVER AND WE DIDN'T WIN A POINT. WE LOST EVERYTHING. THEY'RE GOING TO BE A NUCLEAR POWER AND THEY ARE RICH AND POWERFUL. HOW ABOUT YEMEN. THEY ARE FIGHTING ON THE OTHER SIDE OF YEMEN. AND THEY'RE FIGHTING AND WEE FIGHTING. WHY DIDN'T THEY MAKE THE DEAL TO GET OUT OF YEMEN AND KERRY SAID BECAUSE HE DIDN'T WANT TO COME PLIBLG ATE -- COMPLICATE THE NEGOTIATIONS. THEY DON'T WANT TO BRING SOMETHING ELSE TO COMPLICATE IT. THESE ARE AMATEURS. BUT MY FATHER WOULD SAY TAKE THE LUMPS OUT. SO HERE IS WHAT I WOULD SAY. WE WOULDN'T BE NEGOTIATING BECAUSE OUR PRISONERS WOULD HAVE BEEN BACK YEARS AGO. I WOULD HAVE SAID, LOOK, FELLAS, HERE IS THE STORY. WE HAVE A PROBLEM. OUR COUNTRY IS FLAT BROKE. WE OWE 19 TRILLION AND GOING TO BE 20 TRILLION OR $21 TRILLION WITH THE OMNIBUS VERY SOON. I WANT TO GIVE YOU THE MONEY BACK, I REALLY DO. WE DON'T HAVE IT, I'M SORRY. THEY WOULD HAVE GONE NUTS. THEY WOULD HAVE SAID, WHAT DO YOU MEAN YOU HAVE TO GIVE US -- NO, NO, WE WANT TO. WE DON'T HAVE IT. I WANT TO SO BADLY. WE LOVE YOU. YOU'RE SUCH GREAT PEOPLE. SUCH NICE PEOPLE. SO KIND. TAKE A LOOK AT WHAT THEY DO TO THEIR HOSTAGE AND PRISONERS AND YOU'LL FIND OUT ABOUT TOUGH PEOPLE. GREAT NEGOTIATORS. PERSIANS, GREAT NEGOTIATORS. I WOULD HAVE SAID, REMEMBER, NICE AND EASY. I WOULD HAVE RATHER DONE IT MY WAY, BUT I RESPECTED MY FATHER. SO I WOULD HAVE SAID, WE DON'T HAVE THE MONEY, CAN'T DO IT. THEY WOULD HAVE LEFT AND WE WOULD HAVE LEFT AND WE WOULD HAVE BEEN BACK IN TWO WEEKS. WE WOULD HAVE SAVED $150 BILLION. SO THOSE TWO THINGS. WE WOULD HAVE HAD OUR HOSTAGES BACK AND SAVED $150 BILLION. NOW THEY ARE SO RICH, THEY ARE BUYING AIRLINERS, THEY ARE BUYING EVERYTHING. THEY ARE BUYING PROBABLY NUCLEAR WEAPONS, WE JUST DON'T KNOW ABOUT IT, OKAY. WHAT THE HELL -- DO YOU HAVE TO -- NUCLEAR WEAPONS, WE'RE WORRIED ABOUT THEM MAKING NUCLEAR WEAPONS. THEY'LL BUY THEM. THEY HAVE THE MONEY. THEY MADE SUCH FOOLS OUT OF US. FOLKS, THOSE DAYS ARE OVER. THEY'RE OVER. THEY'RE OVER. I CALL OBAMA THE FIVE-FOR-ONE PRESIDENT. SO WE HAVE A TRADER NAMED SERGEANT BERGDAHL. SO SERGEANT BERGDAHL THINKS HE LIKES THEIR WAY OF LIFE, OBVIOUSLY. OH, THEY HAVE A WONDERFUL WAY OF LIFE. SO ONE DAY HE LEAVES. WE LOSE FIVE AND MAYBE SIX, BUT FIVE AT LEAST PEOPLE LOOKING FOR HIM. THEY WERE KILLED. THEY WERE KILLED BY THE ENEMY. THEY GO OUT THERE LOOKING FOR HIM. THEY KNEW HE LEFT. EVERYBODY WITH HIM KNEW HE LEFT BECAUSE HE WAS ALL WHACKED OUT AND A BELIEVER IN THEM, NOT US. SO THEY KNEW HE LEFT. SO KNOWING THAT, THE FACT THEY HAVE A COLONEL AND I BELIEVE A GENERAL TALKING TO THE PEOPLE THAT KNEW HIM, AND THEY TOLD THE COLONEL AND THE GENERAL THAT HE LEFT. HE DESERTED. REMEMBER THE OLD DAY, A DESERTER, WHAT HAPPENED? BANG. 20 YEARS AGO, IT WAS BANG, BUT SLOWLY. TEN YEARS AGO IT WAS LONG PRISON. TODAY THEY ARE PROBABLY TALKING ABOUT NOTHING. THAT IS WHERE WE'VE COME. BUT I CALL HIM THE FIVE-FOR-ONE. SO WE GET BERGDAHL, RIGHT, A TRADER. AND THEY GET FIVE OF THE MOST VICIOUS KILLERS THAT THEY HAVE, THAT THEY'VE BEEN AFTER FOR NINE YEARS TO GET THEM OUT AND THEY BRING THEM AND THEY ARE BACK ON THE BATTLEFIELD TRYING TO KILL EVERYBODY, INCLUDING US. THIS STUFF HAS GOT TO STOP, FOLKS. AND GITMO, WE'RE NOT CLOSING GITMO. WE'RE GOING TO FILL IT UP. WE'RE NOT CLOSING GITMO. WE'RE NOT CLOSING GITMO. AND I SEE HILLARY CLINTON SAID, I DO NOT LIKE DONALD TRUMP'S TONE. LOOK, HERE IS THE STORY. I THINK I HAVE A GREAT TEMPERAMENT. SHE USES THE WORD TEMPERAMENT BUT I LOVE WHEN SHE USES THE WORD TONE. THEY ARE CHOPPING HEADS OFF OF CHRISTIANS AND EVERYBODY ELSE. WE HAVEN'T SEEN THAT SINCE MEDIEVAL TIMES. YOU READ THE HISTORY BOOKS, THEY CHOPPED OFF HEADS. WELL, THEY ARE CHOPPING OFF HEADS. THEY ARE DROWNING PEOPLE IN STEEL CAGES, BY THE DOZENS, AT A TIME. AND SHE SAYS, WE DON'T LIKE HIS TONE. LET ME TELL YOU, FOLKS, IT IS TIME FOR A TOUGH TONE. WE'VE HAD ENOUGH. WE'VE HAD ENOUGH. WE'VE HAD ENOUGH. WE'VE HAD ENOUGH. SO WE'RE GOING TO DO THINGS THE SMART WAY. I REMEMBER DURING THE DEBATE THEY ASKED ONE OF THE FOLKS ON THE DEBUT STAGE WHO IS BECOMING FRIENDLIER AND FRIENDLIER BY THE DAY WITH ME, WHICH SOME OF THE PEOPLE ARE RECOVERING. IT WAS -- I'LL TELL YOU WHAT. THEY SAY IT WAS THE NASTIEST PRIMARY THAT ANYBODY HAS SEEN. THEY SAY THE NASTIEST IN RECORDED HISTORY. WHO KNEW WHAT WENT ON BEFORE RECORDED. BUT IT WAS PRETTY NASTY. AND SOME OF THE FOLKS, I SAW ONE YESTERDAY, I WILL NOT EVEN MENTION NAMES BECAUSE I WANT TO BE FRIENDS WITH EVERYBODY, RIGHT. I WANT TO BE FRIENDS WITH THEM. EXCEPT FOR THE REAL ENEMY. BUT THEY'LL SIGN A DOCUMENT, ALL RIGHT, IT IS CALLED A PLEDGE. I PLEDGE -- I PLEDGE, I SWEAR, I PLEDGE THAT IF I DON'T MAKE IT, I'M GOING TO SUPPORT THE NOMINEE OF THE PARTY. IT DOESN'T SAY, SUBJECT TO CHANGE, SUBJECT TO THE WEATHER, SUBJECT TO THE SUN DOESN'T COME UP. NO. IT SAID, I PLEDGE. AND FOR THAT PLEDGE, THEY GOT ACCESS TO MILLIONS OF DOLLARS WORTH OF MATERIAL FROM THE REPUBLICAN NATIONAL COMMITTEE, THE RNC. REINCE PRIEBUS, DOING A GREAT JOB. AND IF HE DOESN'T, I'LL TELL YOU. AND IF HE DOESN'T OVER THE NEXT FOUR OR FIVE WEEKS, I'LL TELL YOU. BUT THEY GOT ACCESS. SO THEY SIGNED A PLEDGE THEY WILL SUPPORT. I DON'T WANT THEIR SUPPORT. IT WON'T MEAN ONE VOTE THAN PERHAPS THEIR FAMILY. IT DOESN'T MEAN ANYTHING. BUT I SIGNED THE PLEDGE, TOO. AND EVERYBODY WANTED TO SIGN THE PLEDGE. AND THE REASON THEY SIGNED THE PLEDGE WAS TO GET ME TO SIGN IT. I SIGNED IT. I WOULD HAVE HONORED IT. I SAID PEOPLE SHOULD HONOR PLEDGES. PEOPLE SHOULD HONOR DOCUMENTS WHEN THEY SIGN THEM. YOU KNOW, NOT A BIG DEAL. NOT A BIG DEAL. BUT THEY SHOULD HONOR THEM. SO HERE IS THE STORY, FOLKS. WE'RE LOSING OUR COUNTRY. WE'RE LIKE A PIECE OF SWISS CHEESE AT THE BORDERS. THAT IS GOING TO END. THAT'S GOING TO END. YOU KNOW, THE BORDER PATROL AGENTS, 16,500, FIRST TIME IN HISTORY THEY'VE DONE THIS, THEY'VE NEVER DONE THIS BEFORE, 16,500 BORDER PATROL AGENTS HAVE ENDORSED DONALD TRUMP. THEY KNOW BETTER THAN ANYBODY WHAT IS GOING ON AT THE BORDER. AND BY THE WAY, IF AND WHEN WE WIN, IT IS WE -- I'M JUST A MESSENGER FOLKS, I'M TELLING A MESSAGE OF COMMON STRENGTH BUT I'M JUST YOUR MESSENGER AND I'M DOING A GOOD JOB AS A MAEPGESSENGER, IN ALL FAIRNESS, BUT 16,500 BORDER PATROL AGENTS ENDORSED DONALD TRUMP AND WHAT THEY DO NOW IS STAND THERE WITH BEAUTIFUL EQUIPMENT, GREAT PEOPLE, PEOPLE WALK RIGHT BY THEM. THAT IS AN EASY JOB. THEY CAN'T STAND IT. BECAUSE THEY DON'T LIKE WHAT IS COMING INTO OUR COUNTRY. THEY WANT TO DO THEIR JOB. WITH ME, THEY'RE GOING TO BE WORKING REALLY HARD. AND I SAID TO THEM, WHEN THEY CALLED ME TO TELL ME ABOUT THE ENDORSEMENT, NEVER DONE IT BEFORE, THEY'VE NEVER ENDORSED A PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE BEFORE, 16,500, GREAT, GREAT PEOPLE AND I SAID TO THEM, SO LET ME TELL YOU, I WANT TO ASK YOU THIS QUESTION -- HOW IMPORTANT IS THE WALL? THEY SAID, MR. TRUMP, THE WALL IS VITAL. I DON'T KNOW WHAT I WOULD HAVE DONE IF THEY SAID IT IS NOT IMPORTANT. I WOULD HAVE SAID, I GUESS WE'RE NOT BUILDING IT BECAUSE I RESPECT THESE PEOPLE, THEY KNOW BETTER THAN ANYBODY. THEY KNOW A HELL OF A LOT OF BETTER THAN CONSULTANTS AND PEOPLE MAKING A MILLIONS OF DOLLARS THAT DON'T HAVE A CLUE. WHO IS BETTER AT THAT? I SAID HOW IMPORTANT IS THE WALL? MR. TRUMP, NEVER FORGET THE ANSWER, THE WALL IS VITAL. IT IS VITAL. VERY IMPORTANT. VERY IMPORTANT. THEY ACTUALLY SAID IT IS A TOOL TOWARD REAL SECURITY, AN IMPORTANT TOOL. AND THEN I SPOKE WITH SHERIFF JOE ARPAIO FROM ARIZONA AND HE CALLED ME OUT OF THE BLUE AND I'VE READ ABOUT SHERIFF JOE, I MEAN, HE KNOWS BORDERS, RIGHT. AMAZING GUY. TOUGH GUY. BUT HE'S AN AMAZING GUY. AND HE SAID, MR. TRUMP, I JUST WANT TO YOU KNOW THAT I'M ENDORSING YOU BECAUSE YOU KNOW MORE ABOUT THIS STUFF THAN ANYBODY, YOU KNOW MORE ABOUT THIS STUFF THAN PEOPLE DOING IT FOR 25 YEARS. YOU GET IT. YOU KNOW WHAT IS HAPPENING. I'M ENDORSING YOU. AND HE'S ACTUALLY A QUALITY PERSON. HE'S A TOUGH GUY. BUT HE'S A QUALITY PERSON. HE GETS THE JOB DONE. AMAZING. SO I KNOW ABOUT THAT. AND WHEN IT WAS COMING TIME FOR THE WALL, I'LL NEVER FORGET, VICENTE FOX, ON ONE OF THE MAJOR NETWORKS, USED THE F-BOMB. REMEMBER AND I TOLD THIS STORY A COUPLE OF TIMES. HE SAID, WE WILL NOT PAY FOR THE F-BOMB WALL. AND I SAID, OH, HE'S DEAD. CAN YOU IMAGINE, HEADLINES TOMORROW. HE USED IT ON LIVE TELEVISION. AND I SAID, OH, I FEEL SO BADLY FOR THE GUY. AND NOW IN ONE WAY I WAS HAPPY. BECAUSE HE USED TO SAY, WE'LL NEVER BUILD THE WALL. NOW HE'S SAYING WE'LL NEVER PAY FOR THE WALL. SO WE MADE PROGRESS. ADD LEAST HE'S NOW ADMITTING IT IS GOING TO GET BUILT, RIGHT. AND HE SEEMS LIKE A NICE GUY BUT HE GOT A LITTLE BIT ROUGH. WE WILL NEVER PAY FOR THE -- F-BOMB -- WALL. I SAID OH, THE POOR GUY HE IS GOING TO GET KILLED IN THE PAPERS. NOBODY MENTIONED IT. CAN YOU IMAGINE IF I THREW OUT THE F-BOMB. I THINK IT WILL BE THE ELECTRIC CHAIR, RIGHT. WOULD IT BE THE ELECTRIC CHAIR. AND THE PRESS, I WILL TELL YOU -- THE PEOPLE BACK THERE, AND I WILL TELL YOU THIS, NOT ALL OF THEM, BUT MANY OF THEM ARE THE MOST DISHONEST HUMAN BEINGS ON THE EARTH. THEY ARE THE MOST DISHONEST HUMAN BEINGS ON EARTH. I'VE HAD DAYS THAT ARE SO GOOD, AND THEN YOU WAKE UP THE NEXT MORNING AND YOU SAY, MAN, DID THEY TAKE THAT. I WON'T EVEN SAY WHAT THINGS -- I COULD GO ONE AFTER ANOTHER. AND WE DON'T MAKE A LOT OF MISTAKES, ALL OF US, WE DON'T MAKE MISTAKES BUT WHAT THEY DO IS TAKE A SENTENCE AND MAKE IT MUCH DIFFERENT THAN WHAT YOU SAID, MUCH DIFFERENT FROM WHAT YOU MEANT. AND ALL OF A SUDDEN, THEY'LL SAY, DONALD TRUMP HAD A BAD WEEK BECAUSE HE SAID SOMETHING PERFECT. PERFECT. OKAY. PERFECT. I'M TELLING YOU, FOLKS, AND I TELL IT ALL OF THE TIME, BECAUSE AS A REPUBLICAN, AND AS A REPUBLICAN CONSERVATIVE, WE ARE AT A TREMENDOUS DISADVANTAGE. YOU LOOK AT THE WAY THEY TREAT CROOKED HILLARY, YOU TAKE A LOOK AT THIS COMPARED TO THE WAY THEY TREAT OTHER PEOPLE, OR THE WAY THEY TREAT ME, THEY ARE SOME OF THE WORST HUMAN BEINGS ON EARTH. I REALLY MEAN IT. I REALLY MEAN IT. YOU KNOW, WHERE ARE MY PROTESTS. I WANT SOME PROTESTERS. YOU KNOW, LOOK AT THIS ROOM. THE GOVERNOR JUST SAID HE'S NEVER SEEN A ROOM LIKE THIS IN INDIANA WITH THIS MANY PEOPLE. HE'S NEVER SEEN ANYTHING LIKE IT. LOOK AT THIS THING. THIS IS WHERE YOUR FOOTBALL TEAM -- LOOK AT THE CEILINGS. EVERYTHING IS NIGHT. I ALWAYS TALK ABOUT THE WALL IS GOING TO BE REALLY HIGH, BUT THAT IS REALLY HIGH UP THERE. THAT IS A BIG ONE. BUT YOU DON'T SEE CROWDS LIKE THIS. WE HAVE CROWDS LIKE THIS EVERYWHERE, NO MATTER WHERE WE GO. AND EVERY TIME I GO HOME AND MY WIFE SAYS HOW WAS THE CROWD. AND I ALWAYS SAY, DIDN'T YOU SEE IT? THEY KEEP THOSE CAMERAS ON MY FACE, THEY NEVER TAKE THE CAMERAS OFF MY FACE BECAUSE THEY DON'T WANT PEOPLE -- I WISH THEY WOULD TURN THE CAMERAS OVER HERE. TAKE A LOOK AT THIS CROWD. TAKE A LOOK AT THIS CROWD. LOOK, THE CAMERAS AREN'T MOVING. THEY ARE REALLY DISHONEST. I REALLY MEAN THIS. THEY ARE SO DISHONEST. THAT IS WHY I LOVE MY PROTESTERS. BECAUSE THE ONLY TIME THEY MOVE THE CAMERAS ARE WHEN WE HAVE A PROTEST. IF SOMEBODY WERE UP THERE SCREAMING OR SHOUTING, THE CAMERAS, WHICH I USED TO THINK WERE IN A FIXED POSITION, I SAID MAYBE MECHANICALLY THEY CAN'T MOVE, BUT WHEN WE HAVE A PROTESTER, THEY TURN AND -- THEY ARE LIKE A PRETZEL ALL OVER THE PLACE. THROUGH THE CAMERAMAN'S LEGS, UP AROUND HIS ANKLES. YOU NEVER SAW CAMERAS MOVE LIKE THIS. THE FACT IS THAT YOU HAVE TO KNOW WHAT YOU'RE GETTING. AND THE SYSTEM IS WONDERFUL IN MANY WAYS, BUT REALLY BAD IN OTHERS. AND ONE OF THE WORST ASPECTS OF OUR SYSTEM IS THE DISHONEST PRESS. THE DISHONEST MEDIA IS ONE OF THE WORST THINGS. I REALLY MEAN IT. THEY WRITE AND SAY THINGS THAT ARE DISGRACEFUL. SO -- AND I LIKE TO SAY, YOU KNOW WHAT, WHEN PEOPLE SEE OR READ OR HEAR THINGS, THEY'LL SAY, I'LL TELL YOU WHAT -- ONE OF THE MOST INCREDIBLE -- PEOPLE SAY WHAT HAVE YOU LEARNED? I SAID, YOU KNOW WHAT I'VE LEARNED IS HOW SMART THE PEOPLE ARE. BECAUSE THEIR RATING IS SO LOW, THEY ARE SO -- THOUGHT OF SO BADLY, IT IS LIKE HOW SMART THE PEOPLE WERE. AND I'LL SAY THIS. VARIOUS ANCHORS, SOME OF WHOM TRULY DISLIKE DONALD TRUMP HAVE SAID WHAT HAS HAPPENED TO US -- TO US, I'M THE MESSENGER, YOU'RE THE IMPORTANT ONES IN THIS WHOLE THING, BUT WHAT HAPPENED TO US IS ONE OF THE GREATEST POLITICAL PHENOMENONS THEY'VE EVER SEEN IN THE HISTORY OF THE COUNTRY. I DIDN'T EVEN KNOW THAT. I DIDN'T EVEN KNOW THAT. BILL O'REILLY, OF COURSE I'M ON HIS SHOW TONIGHT SO IF YOU GET HOME YOU WILL SEE THE SECOND EDITION. BUT BILL O'REILLY SAID, THE SINGLE GREATEST POLITICAL PHENOMENON THAT HE'S SEEN IN HIS LIFETIME. NOW HE'S A PRO. A SMART GUY AND TOUGH. TOUGH. BUT THE SINGLE GREATEST POLITICAL PHENOMENON THAT HE'S SEEN IN HIS LIFETIME IS DONALD TRUMP AND ALL OF US, THE WHOLE THING. WE'VE BEEN ON THE COVER -- WE'VE BEEN ON THE COVER OF "TIME" MAGAZINE, SO MUCH THAT IT BECOMES ROUTINE. IN FACT, THEY JUST TOLD ME, MR. TRUMP, SIR, YOU'RE ON THE COVER OF "TIME" MAGAZINE AGAIN THIS WEEK. I SAID ALL RIGHT. IN THE OLD DAYS, I WOULD SAY THAT IS A BIG DEAL. AND NOW IT IS LIKE, REALLY, THAT IS GOOD, THAT IS ALL RIGHT. YOU'RE ON THE COVER OF TIME MAGAZINE. I'M NOT ON THE COVER OF TIME MAGAZINE. YOU'RE ON THE COVER. JUST REMEMBER THAT. SO WE HAVE A LOT OF THINGS THAT ARE TAKING PLACE. WE HAVE A BADEN EMMY, WE HAVE AN ENEMY THAT IS DISHONEST AND A PRESS THAT IS DISHONEST. WE HAVE A GROUP OF PEOPLE THAT WANT TO GET ELECTED WHO HAVE A RIGGED SYSTEM AND WHO HAVE REALLY RIGGED THE SYSTEM TO A LARGE EXTENT. THEY'VE REALLY RIGGED THE SYSTEM. SAY WHAT YOU WANT ABOUT BERNIE SANDERS, BUT THE SUPER-DELEGATES, THAT WAS WORSE THAN WHAT HAPPENED WITH US. AND FRANKLY, THE ONLY REASON I COULD WIN IS WE WON IN SUCH LANDSLIDES ALL OVER THE PLACE, INCLUDING IN INDIANA. WHAT A LANDSLIDE THAT WAS. AND WE LOVE BOBBY KNIGHT. DO WE LOVE BOBBY KNIGHT. OH, THAT BOBBY KNIGHT. I LOVE MY BOBBY KNIGHT. WE HAD SO MANY COACHES, GENE AND DIGGER AND BOBBY. WE HAD SO MANY COACHES. LOU, LOU HOLTS. WE HAD SO MANY COACHES THAT CAME OUT IN OUR FAVOR. I DO WELL WITH COACHES. BUT THE COACHES LIKE ME. BUT BOBBY WAS OUT HERE WORKING REALLY HARD. AND I COULD SEE IT RIGHT AT THE BEGINNING. THIS WAS GOING TO BE THE WATER SHED. BUT BOBBY CAME OUT AND I CAME OUT AND WE WENT TO A RINAS -- ARENA ARENAS, YOU'VE NEVER SEEN SO MANY PEOPLE. MAYBE YOU'VE BEEN AT SOME OF THE ARENAS. IT IS AMAZING. SO HERE IS THE STORY, FOLKS. WE HAVE TO STOP FOUR MORE YEARS OF OBAMA. WE'VE GOT TO STOP HILLARY CLINTON, WHO IS AS CROOKED AS THEY COME. WE'VE GOT TO BRING OUR COUNTRY BACK. WE HAVE TO MAKE GREAT TRADE DEALS AGAIN. WE'RE GOING TO MAKE DEAL THAT'S BRING OUR JOBS BACK. AND WE'RE GOING TO GET ALONG GREAT WITH THESE COUNTRIES AND TRADE WITH THESE COUNTRIES. I AM NOT AN ISOLATIONIST, I'M A FREE TRADER. BUT I'M A FREE TRADE TORE MAKE GREAT DEAL -- TRADE TORE MAKE GREAT DEALS, NOT TO MAKE HORRIBLE DEALS. ONE OF THE PEOPLE STANDING RIGHT THERE, SAID TO ME, MR. TRUMP, ARE YOU AN ISOLATIONIST, AND MR. TRUMP -- AND I SAID NO. AND WHAT IS YOUR DEFINITION OF TRADE? AND I SAID VERY SIMPLE. I KNOW FREE AND I KNOW EVERY FORM OF TRADE KNOWN TO MANKIND. HERE IS MY DEFINITION OF TRADE. MY DEFINITION OF "TRADE" IS THAT I WANT TO MAKE GREAT DEALS FOR THE AMERICAN PEOPLE. YOU CAN CALL IT WHATEVER THE HELL YOU WANT. OKAY. AND WE'RE GOING TO. WE'RE GOING TO BRING OUR JOBS BACK. WE'RE GOING TO BRING OUR MANUFACTURING BACK. YOU LOOK AT WHAT HAS HAPPENED TO THE MANUFACTURING SINCE BILL CLINTON SIGNED PROBABLY THE WORST DEAL ECONOMICALLY IN THE HISTORY OF OUR COUNTRY, NAFTA. THAT DEAL WAS SIGNED BY BILL CLINTON. YOU LOOK AT AREAS EVEN FROM HERE, BUT YOU LOOK AT PLACES, YOU LOOK AT PLACES LIKE NEW ENGLAND AND NEW YORK STATE AND PENNSYLVANIA, GREAT STATE -- WE'RE LEADING IN PENNSYLVANIA BY THE WAY. IT JUST CAME OUT. I HEAR WE'RE LEADING IN FLORIDA. I HEAR WE'RE LEADING IN OHIO. I HEAR WE'RE LEADING ALL OVER THE PLACE. AND THE RASMUSSEN POLL JUST CAME OUT, WE'RE LEADING NASHLTIONALLY. BUT WE HAVE A LONG WAY TO GO. WE ARE DEALING WITH A DISHONEST SYSTEM AND A CROOKED SYSTEM AND A RIGGED SYSTEM SO WE HAVE A LONG WAY TO GO FOLKS, AND WE DON'T WANT ANYBODY TO TAKE IT AWAY FROM US. AND WHEN THIS PERSON SAID TO ME, BY THE WAY, WHAT YOU'VE DONE IS NEVER DONE BEFORE, CONGRATULATIONS, IT DOESN'T EVEN MATTER IF YOU WIN OR LOSE THE ELECTION, WHAT YOU'VE DONE HAS NEVER BEEN DONE BEFORE, WINNING ALL OF THE PRIMARIES, BEATING GREAT PROFESSIONALS AND THEY ARE VERY TALENTED PEOPLE, IT HAS NEVER BEEN DONE BEFORE, YOU WILL GO DOWN IN THE HISTORY BOOKS, MR. TRUMP. I SAID DO ME A FAVOR. DON'T EVEN TELL ME ABOUT IT. BECAUSE IF I DON'T WIN THE NEXT ONE, I WILL CONSIDER IT A BIG, FAT WASTE OF TIME AND $55 MILLION I PUT UP, AND I'M STILL PUTTING UP A LOT MORE. AND NOW WE RAISED $51 MILLION LAST MONTH AND WE STARTED TOWARD THE MIDDLE OF THE MONTH. AND EVERYONE WAS SHOCKED. AND MUCH OF THAT MONEY CAME IN SMALL DONATIONS LIKE $71 AVERAGE OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT. AND I PUT UP MILLIONS. BUT I DID IT, LIKE, I WANT TO INCENTIVIZE PEOPLE AND I WANT PEOPLE TO REALIZE, I'M RAISING MONEY FOR THE REPUBLICAN PARTY AND THE RNC. THAT IS WHAT WE WANT TO DO. BECAUSE WE WANT TO KEEP OUR MAJORITY. WE WANT TO KEEP OUR HOUSE. WE WANT TO KEEP OUR SENATE. BECAUSE I'LL TELL YOU WHAT, IF WE CAN DO THAT, AND WE HAVE TRUMP AS PRESIDENT, WE ARE GOING TO BE ABLE TO DO THINGS THAT ARE GOING TO BE SO GREAT FOR OUR COUNTRY. GOING TO BE AMAZING. YOU KNOW, WE'RE RUN OF THE HIGHEST TAXED NATIONS IN THE WORLD. AND YET IN GOING AROUND AND MEETING WITH PEOPLE, SMALL BUSINESS PEOPLE, BIG BUSINESS PEOPLE, IF THEY HAD THEIR CHANCE, AND IF THEY HAD THEIR CHOICE, THEY WOULD RATHER GET RID OF RULES AND REGULATION -- WE HAVE THE WORST REGULATIONS ANYWHERE IN THE WORLD. THEY ACTUALLY WOULD RATHER PAY MORE TAX, WHICH IS SURPRISING, AND GET RID OF THESE REGULATIONS THAT ARE CHOKING EVERYBODY. PEOPLE CAN'T RUN THEIR BUSINESSES. SO WE'RE GOING TO TURN THINGS AROUND. WE'RE GOING TO TURN THEM AROUND FAST. WE'RE NOT GOING TO LOSE CARRIER AIR-CONDITIONING FROM INDIANAPOLIS. YOU KNOW THAT DEAL VERY WELL. THOSE PEOPLE HAVE FOLLOWED ME ALL OVER THE PLACE. 1400 PEOPLE, OUT OF JOBS, VISUALLY THEIR MOVING TO MEXICO. ANY OF THE CARRIER FOLKS IN THIS ROOM? BECAUSE WE HAVE -- WE HAVE A LOT -- LOOK AT THAT. WHY ARE YOU IN THE BACK ROW. YOU SHOULD BE IN THE FRONT ROW. BUT WE HAD -- DURING THE SEASON, WE HAD SO MANY OF THEM THAT FOLLOWED US AROUND. THEY FELT SO BADLY. WE'RE NOT GOING TO LET THAT HAPPEN. PEOPLE AND COUNTRIES TAKE OUR COMPANIES AND TAKE OUR JOBS, THERE ARE GOING TO BE CONSEQUENCES. THEY WON'T TAKE THEM. BECAUSE WE'RE NOT GOING TO LET CARRIER COME IN AND MAKE AIR-CONDITIONERS IN MEXICO AND SELL THE AIR-CONDITIONERS TO US, ACROSS A VERY STRONG BORDER NOW, WITHOUT CONSEQUENCE. AND WHEN WE EXPLAIN TO THE HEADS OF CARRIER THAT HERE IS THE STORY, EITHER STAY OR IF YOU WANT TO GO TO MEXICO, WE WISH YOU A LOT OF LUCK BUT WHEN YOU SELL YOUR AIR-CONDITIONERS, YOU ARE GOING TO PAY A 35% TAX FOR THE AIR-CONDITIONERS TO COME ACROSS THE BORDER. AND YOU KNOW WHAT IS GOING TO HAPPEN. THEY ARE NOT GOING TO MOVE. THEY'RE NOT GOING TO MOVE. THIS GOVERNMENT WAS THINKING ABOUT LOW INTEREST LOANS, ZERO INTEREST LOANS AND WAYS TO KEEP OUR KPZCOMPANIES. YOU DON'T NEED THAT. THEY DON'T NEED MONEY. THEY'RE MAKING PLENTY OF MONEY. BUT WE WON'T LET THEM JUST TAKE OUR COMPANIES OUT AND FIRE EVERYBODY. THESE ARE PEOPLE WITH CARRIER FOR MANY, MANY YEARS. WE'RE NOT GOING TO LET IT HAPPEN. AND WE'RE GOING TO HAVE A COUNTRY THAT IS SO SMART AGAIN. SO HERE IS THETORY, FOLKS. WE DON'T WIN ANY MORE. WE'RE GOING TO START WINNING. WE'RE GOING TO WIN WITH OUR MILITARY. WE'RE GOING TO KICK THE HELL OUT OF ISIS. WE HAVE TO END IT. WE HAVE NO CHOICE. WE'RE GOING TO TAKE CARE OF OUR VETS. SO IMPORTANT. OUR VETS ARE BEING TREATED SO BADLY. I HAVE SUCH GREAT VETERAN SUPPORT. WE'RE GOING TO TAKE CARE OF OUR VETERANS. WE'RE GOING TO HAVE STRONG BORDERS. WE'RE GOING TO HAVE THE WALL -- OH, THAT WALL IS GOING TO BE AS BEAUTIFUL AS A WALL COULD BE. SOMEBODY SAID, MR. TRUMP, SIR, THEY'RE GOING TO CALL IT THE TRUMP WALL. I SAID, WELL THEN I BETTER BUILD IT BIG AND BEAUTIFUL, RIGHT. NO. NO, I DON'T WANT THAT. BUT WE NEED -- WE NEED GREAT BORDERS. BECAUSE WITHOUT BORDERS, WE DON'T HAVE A COUNTRY. WE'RE GOING TO MAKE GREAT TRADE DEALS. OUR JOBS ARE GOING TO COME BACK. WE'RE GOING TO MAKE A LOT OF MONEY ON TRADE. RIGHT NOW WE LOSE ALL OF THIS MONEY. YOU LOOK AT JAPAN, THE BIGGEST SHIPS YOU'VE EVER SEEN FLOATING IN, AND I WAS IN LOS ANGELES, THEY FLOAT IN THESE MASSIVE, MASSIVE SHIPS LOADED UP WITH CARS. AND THE CARS ARE POURING JUST LIKE -- I MEAN, NASCAR. I LOVE NASCAR. I LOVE BRIAN FRANCE. HE ENDORSED ME FROM NASCAR, RIGHT. NASCAR. IT IS LIKE NASCAR DRIVERS. KING RICHARD ENDORSED ME. A LOT OF THE GUYS ENDORSED ME. RICHARD PETTY. THEY COME IN AND THEY ARE POURING OFF THESE BOATS. WE SEND THEM WHEAT. WE SEND THEM BEEF. AND WHEN IT GETS THERE, THEY DON'T EVEN WANT IT. THEY SEND IT BACK. YOU WANT TO SEE TRADE IMBALANCE, LOOK AT THE IMBALANCE WE HAVE WITH JAPAN. IT WILL END, FOLKS. WE'RE GOING TO HAVE SMART PEOPLE NOW. WE'RE GOING TO MAKE GREAT DEALS AND FAIR DEALS AND GET ALONG GREAT WITH JAPAN. WE'RE GOING TO GET ALONG BETTER WITH THESE COUNTRIES AND THEY'RE GOING TO TREAT US FAIRLY. AND WE HAVE ALL OF THE CARDS. JUST REMEMBER THAT. WE'RE THE PIGGY BANK. BUT THEY ARE GOING TO BREAK OUR PIGGY BANK VERY SOON. BUT WITH THE PIGGY BANK, THEY TAKE THE MONEY OUT. WE HAVE REBUILT CHINA. THE MONEY THEY'VE TAKEN OUT OF THIS COUNTRY, I MEAN THEY HAVE TRAINS THAT CAN HE CAN ONLY DREAM ABOUT. THEY HAVE HIGHWAYS THAT WE CAN ONLY DREAM ABOUT. PLACES OUTSIDE OF THIS COUNTRY IN THE MIDDLE EAST, DIFFERENT PLACES HAVE AIRPORTS THAT WE CAN ONLY DREAM ABOUT. WE USED TO BE AT THE TOP. NOW WE'RE LIKE A THIRD-WORLD COUNTRY. SO HERE IS WHAT I SAY. WE'RE GOING TO START WINNING AGAIN. WE'RE GOING TO WIN SO MUCH. YOU'RE GOING TO BE SO PROUD OF YOUR COUNTRY. WE'RE GOING TO WIN SO MUCH. YOU'RE GOING TO BE SO HAPPY. YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE YOUR JOBS BACK. YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE YOUR PRIDE BACK. I OFTEN JOKE, YOU'LL BE CALLING UP MIKE PENCE, I DON'T KNOW WHETHER HE'S GOING TO BE YOUR GOVERNOR OR YOUR VICE PRESIDENT OR WHO THE HELL KNOWS. BUT YOU'RE GOING TO CALL UP -- GOOD MAN. BUT YOU'RE GOING TO CALL HIM AND YOU COULD EITHER SAY, GOVERNOR, OR VICE PRESIDENT, SIR, PLEASE, PLEASE SPEAK TO MR. TRUMP. WE'RE WINNING TOO MUCH. WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIANA, CANNOT STAND ALL OF THESE VICTORIES. WE CAN'T TAKE IT. WE'RE NOT USED TO IT. PLEASE, WE'RE WINNING WITH OUR MILITARY. WE'RE GOING TO BEAT ISIS. WE'RE WINNING ON TRADE. WE'RE WINNING AT THE BORDER. WE'RE STOPPING DRUGS FROM POURING IN. WE'RE WINNING ON EDUCATION. WE'RE WINNING WITH OUR SECOND AMENDMENT. PLEASE, PLEASE, MIKE, HELP US. WE'RE WINNING TOO MUCH. AND MIKE WILL COME TO SEE ME. AND SAY, MR. PRESIDENT, SIR, THEY'RE WINNING TOO MUCH. THE PEOPLE OF INDIANA CAN'T STAND IT. I SAY, MIKE, GO BACK AND TELL THEM, WE'RE NOT CHANGING A DAMN THING. WE'RE GOING TO KEEP WINNING. AND WE'RE GOING TO WIN AT EVERY LEVEL. AND WE ARE GOING TO MAKE AMERICA SO GREAT AGAIN, WE'RE GOING TO MAKE AMERICA GREATER THAN EVER BEFORE. I LOVE YOU INDIANA. THANK YOU FOR ALL OF YOUR HELP. YOU'RE REALLY SPECIAL PEOPLE. THANK YOU. WE LOVE YOU. THANK YOU VERY MUCH, EVERYBODY. THANK YOU. THANK YOU.


7/11/2016






6/28/2016


It is great to be here. Id like to thank Alumisource and all the amazing workers here for hosting us. Today, I am going to talk about how to Make America Wealthy Again.
We are thirty miles from Steel City. Pittsburgh played a central role in building our nation.
The legacy of Pennsylvania steelworkers lives in the bridges, railways and skyscrapers that make up our great American landscape.
But our workers loyalty was repaid with betrayal.
Our politicians have aggressively pursued a policy of globalization  moving our jobs, our wealth and our factories to Mexico and overseas.
Globalization has made the financial elite who donate to politicians very wealthy. But it has left millions of our workers with nothing but poverty and heartache.
When subsidized foreign steel is dumped into our markets, threatening our factories, the politicians do nothing.
For years, they watched on the sidelines as our jobs vanished and our communities were plunged into depression-level unemployment.
Many of these areas have still never recovered.
Our politicians took away from the people their means of making a living and supporting their families.
Skilled craftsmen and tradespeople and factory workers have seen the jobs they loved shipped thousands of miles away.
Many Pennsylvania towns once thriving and humming are now in a state despair.
This wave of globalization has wiped out our middle class.
It doesnt have to be this way. We can turn it all around  and we can turn it around fast.
But if were going to deliver real change, were going to have to reject the campaign of fear and intimidation being pushed by powerful corporations, media elites, and political dynasties.
The people who rigged the system for their benefit will do anything  and say anything  to keep things exactly as they are.
The people who rigged the system are supporting Hillary Clinton because they know as long as she is in charge nothing will ever change.
The inner cities will remain poor.
The factories will remain closed.
The borders will remain open.
The special interests will remain firmly in control.
Hillary Clinton and her friends in global finance want to scare America into thinking small  and they want to scare the American people out of voting for a better future.
READ: How Donald Trump Says Hed Win Americas Trade War
Top U.S. Labor Leader Blasts Donald Trump in Dueling Speeches
My campaign has the opposite message.
I want you to imagine how much better your life can be if we start believing in America again.
I want you to imagine how much better our future can be if we declare independence from the elites whove led us to one financial and foreign policy disaster after another.
Our friends in Britain recently voted to take back control of their economy, politics and borders.
I was on the right side of that issue  with the people  while Hillary, as always, stood with the elites, and both she and president Obama predicted that one wrong.
Now its time for the American people to take back their future.
Thats the choice we face. We can either give in to Hillary Clintons campaign of fear, or we can choose to Believe In America.
We lost our way when we stopped believing in our country.
America became the worlds dominant economy by becoming the worlds dominant producer.
The wealth this created was shared broadly, creating the biggest middle class the world had ever known.
But then America changed its policy from promoting development in America, to promoting development in other nations.
We allowed foreign countries to subsidize their goods, devalue their currencies, violate their agreements, and cheat in every way imaginable.
Trillions of our dollars and millions of our jobs flowed overseas as a result.
I have visited cities and towns across this country where a third or even half of manufacturing jobs have been wiped out in the last 20 years.
Today, we import nearly $800 billion more in goods than we export.
This is not some natural disaster. It is politician-made disaster.
It is the consequence of a leadership class that worships globalism over Americanism.
This is a direct affront to our Founding Fathers, who wanted America to be strong, independent and free.
Our Founding Fathers Understood Trade
George Washington said that the promotion of domestic manufactur[ing] will be among the first consequences to flow from an energetic government.
Alexander Hamilton spoke frequently of the expediency of encouraging manufactur[ing] in the United States. The first Republican President, Abraham Lincoln, warned that: The abandonment of the protective policy by the American government must produce want and ruin among our people.
Our original Constitution did not even have an income tax. Instead, it had tariffs  emphasizing taxation of foreign, not domestic, production.
Yet today, 240 years after the Revolution, we have turned things completely upside-down.
We tax and regulate and restrict our companies to death, then we allow foreign countries that cheat to export their goods to us tax-free.
As a result, we have become more dependent on foreign countries than ever before.
Ladies and Gentlemen, its time to declare our economic independence once again.
That means reversing two of the worst legacies of the Clinton years.
America has lost nearly one-third of its manufacturing jobs since 1997  even as the country has increased its population by 50 million people.
At the center of this catastrophe are two trade deals pushed by Bill and Hillary Clinton.
First, the North American Free Trade Agreement, or NAFTA. Second, Chinas entry into the World Trade Organization.
NAFTA was the worst trade deal in history, and Chinas entrance into the World Trade Organization has enabled the greatest jobs theft in history.
It was Bill Clinton who signed NAFTA in 1993, and Hillary Clinton who supported it.
It was also Bill Clinton who lobbied for Chinas disastrous entry into the World Trade Organization, and Hillary Clinton who backed that terrible agreement.
Then, as Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton stood by idly while China cheated on its currency, added another trillion dollars to our trade deficits, and stole hundreds of billions of dollars in our intellectual property.
The city of Pittsburgh, and the State of Pennsylvania, have lost one-third of their manufacturing jobs since the Clintons put China into the WTO.
Fifty thousand factories across America have shut their doors in that time.
Almost half of our entire manufacturing trade deficit in goods with the world is the result of trade with China.
It was also Hillary Clinton, as Secretary of State, who shoved us into a job-killing deal with South Korea in 2012.
As reported by the Economic Policy Institute in May, this deal doubled our trade deficit with South Korea and destroyed nearly 100,000 American jobs.
As Bernie Sanders said, Hillary Clinton Voted for virtually every trade agreement that has cost the workers of this country millions of jobs.
Trade reform, and the negotiation of great trade deals, is the quickest way to bring our jobs back.
To understand why trade reform creates jobs, we need to understand how all nations grow and prosper.
Massive trade deficits subtract directly from our Gross Domestic Product.
From 1947 to 2001  a span of over five decades  our inflation-adjusted gross domestic product grew at a rate of 3.5%.
However, since 2002  the year after we fully opened our markets to Chinese imports  that GDP growth rate has been cut almost in half.
What does this mean for Americans? For every one percent of GDP growth we fail to generate in any given year, we also fail to create over one million jobs.
Americas job creation deficit due to slower growth since 2002 is well over 20 million jobs  and thats just about the number of jobs our country needs right now to put America back to work at decent wages.
The Transpacific-Partnership is the greatest danger yet.
The TPP would be the death blow for American manufacturing.
It would give up all of our economic leverage to an international commission that would put the interests of foreign countries above our own.
It would further open our markets to aggressive currency cheaters. It would make it easier for our trading competitors to ship cheap subsidized goods into U.S. markets  while allowing foreign countries to continue putting barriers in front of our exports.
The TPP would lower tariffs on foreign cars, while leaving in place the foreign practices that keep American cars from being sold overseas. The TPP even created a backdoor for China to supply car parts for automobiles made in Mexico.
The agreement would also force American workers to compete directly against workers from Vietnam, one of the lowest wage countries on Earth.
Not only will the TPP undermine our economy, but it will undermine our independence.
The TPP creates a new international commission that makes decisions the American people cant veto.
These commissions are great Hillary Clintons Wall Street funders who can spend vast amounts of money to influence the outcomes.
It should be no surprise then that Hillary Clinton, according to Bloomberg, took a leading part in drafting the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
She praised or pushed the TPP on 45 separate occasions, and even called it the gold standard.
Hillary Clinton was totally for the TPP just a short while ago, but when she saw my stance, which is totally against, she was shamed into saying she would be against it too  but have no doubt, she will immediately approve it if it is put before her, guaranteed.
She will do this just as she has betrayed American workers for Wall Street throughout her career.
Heres how it would go: she would make a small token change, declare the pact fixed, and ram it through.
Thats why Hillary is now only saying she has problems with the TPP in its current form,  ensuring that she can rush to embrace it again at her earliest opportunity.
If the media doesnt believe me, I have a challenge for you. Ask Hillary Clinton if she is willing to withdraw from the TPP her first day in office and unconditionally rule out its passage in any form.
There is no way to fix the TPP. We need bilateral trade deals. We do not need to enter into another massive international agreement that ties us up and binds us down.
A Trump Administration will change our failed trade policy  quickly
Here are 7 steps I would pursue right away to bring back our jobs.
One: I am going to withdraw the United States from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which has not yet been ratified.
Two: Im going to appoint the toughest and smartest trade negotiators to fight on behalf of American workers.
Three: Im going to direct the Secretary of Commerce to identify every violation of trade agreements a foreign country is currently using to harm our workers. I will then direct all appropriate agencies to use every tool under American and international law to end these abuses.
Four: Im going tell our NAFTA partners that I intend to immediately renegotiate the terms of that agreement to get a better deal for our workers. And I dont mean just a little bit better, I mean a lot better. If they do not agree to a renegotiation, then I will submit notice under Article 2205 of the NAFTA agreement that America intends to withdraw from the deal.
Five: I am going to instruct my Treasury Secretary to label China a currency manipulator. Any country that devalues their currency in order to take advantage of the United States will be met with sharply
Six: I am going to instruct the U.S. Trade Representative to bring trade cases against China, both in this country and at the WTO. Chinas unfair subsidy behavior is prohibited by the terms of its entrance to the WTO, and I intend to enforce those rules.
Seven: If China does not stop its illegal activities, including its theft of American trade secrets, I will use every lawful presidential power to remedy trade disputes, including the application of tariffs consistent with Section 201 and 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 and Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962.
President Reagan deployed similar trade measures when motorcycle and semiconductor imports threatened U.S. industry. His tariff on Japanese motorcycles was 45% and his tariff to shield Americas semiconductor industry was 100%.
Hillary Clinton, and her campaign of fear, will try to spread the lie that these actions will start a trade war. She has it completely backwards.
Hillary Clinton unleashed a trade war against the American worker when she supported one terrible trade deal after another  from NAFTA to China to South Korea.
A Trump Administration will end that war by getting a fair deal for the American people.
The era of economic surrender will finally be over.
A new era of prosperity will finally begin.
America will be independent once more.
Under a Trump Presidency, the American worker will finally have a President who will protect them and fight for them.
We will stand up to trade cheating anywhere and everywhere it threatens an American job.
We will make America the best place in the world to start a business, hire workers, and open a factory.
This includes massive tax reform to lift the crushing burdens on American workers and businesses.
We will also get rid of wasteful rules and regulations which are destroying our job creation capacity.
Many people think that these regulations are an even greater impediment than the fact that we are one of the highest taxed nations in the world.
We are also going to fully capture Americas tremendous energy capacity. This will create vast profits for our workers and begin reducing our deficit. Hillary Clinton wants to shut down energy production and shut down the mines.
A Trump Administration will also ensure that we start using American steel for American infrastructure.
Just like the American steel from Pennsylvania that built the Empire State building.
It will be American steel that will fortify Americans crumbling bridges.
It will be American steel that sends our skyscrapers soaring into the sky.
It will be American steel that rebuilds our inner cities.
It will be American hands that remake this country, and it will be American energy  mined from American resources  that powers this country.
It will be American workers who are hired to do the job.
We are going to put American-produced steel back into the backbone of our country. This alone will create massive numbers of jobs.
On trade, on immigration, on foreign policy, we are going to put America First again.
We are going to make America wealthy again.
We are going to reject Hillary Clintons politics of fear, futility, and incompetence.
We are going to embrace the possibilities of change.
It is time to believe in the future.
It is time to believe in each other.
It is time to Believe In America.
This Is How We Are Going To Make America Great Again  For All Americans.
We Are Going To Make America Great Again For Everyone  Greater Than Ever Before.
Thank you.